> 来源：The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America\The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 17. Doglio, op. cit., p. 56.

18. Willy Hellpach, Mensch und Volk der Grossstadt (Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke, 1939; 2d ed. rev., 1952). The quotation, from the Preface of the book (p. 9), concluded a report on "The origin and formation of urban ethnic types," given by

Hellpach in 1935 at the International Congress of Demographers in Berlin.

19. David Lewis, "Complesso residenziale Park Hill a Sheffield. Un'esperienza rivoluzionaria," Casabella-continuita, no. 263 (May 1962), pp. 5-9, passage cited p.7. 20 Bahrdt, Die moderne Grossstadt, Soziologische Uberlegungen zum Städtebau (Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1961).

21.Milizia, Principj di architettura civile, p. 663

22. Fontana, Della Trasportatione dell' Obelisco Vaticano et delle Fabriche di Nostro Signore Papa Sisto V, fatto dal Cav. Carlo Fontana, Architetto di Sua Santita (Rome, 1590; 2d ed., Naples, 1604), pt. II, fol. 18; cited in Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 5th ed. rev., 1967), p. 106. Giedion discusses the transformation of the Coliseum in his chapter on Sixtus V (1585-1590) and the Planning of Baroque Rome," pp. 75-106. The importance of this transformation was noted for the first time by Gideon, even if not with the same implications.

23. Françoise Lehoux, Le Bourg Saint-Germain-des-Prés depuis ses origines jusqu'à la fin de la Guerre de Cent Ans (Paris: the author, 1951); Pierre Lavedan, Les villes françaises. On the formation of Paris, in addition to Marcel Poète's books, there are some particularly important studies of historical topography. In the series Bibliothèque d'histoire de Paris, see Louis Halphen, Paris sous les premiers Capétiens (987-1223). Etude de topographie historique (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1909). Several works have acquired an exceptional importance for the history of the urban structure, providing a series of dates and information that allow one to understand profoundly the mechanism of the urban dynamic in the formation of the modern city. See, in the same series, Georges Huisman, La juridiction de la Municipalité parisienne, de Saint Louis à Charles VIIe (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1912); see esp. chap. VII: “La juridiction du domaine de la ville," "La juridiction du domaine municipal publice," "La juridiction du domaine privé."

24. Pirenne, Les villes et les institutions urbaines, 2 vols. (4th ed., Paris: Félix Alcan, and Brussels: Office de Publicité, 1939). Also, Henri Pirenne, Les villes du Moyen-Age. Essai d'histoire économique et sociale (Brussels: Maurice Lamertin, 1927); trans. I. E. Clegg, Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1937). 25. Pirenne, Les villes et les institutions urbaines, p. 345.   
26. Ibid., p. 338.

27. Ibid., p. 48.

28. Vincenzo Rizzi, I cosidetti Statuti Murattiani per la città di Bari. Regolamenti edilizi particolari (Bari: Leonardo da Vinci, 1959).

29. Hall, London 2000 (London: Faber and Faber, 1963). See pp. 26, 162-64.

30. Barral, Diecinueve figuras de mi historica civil (Barcelona: Jaime Salinas, 1961).

31. Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française . . ., vol. VIII, “Style," p. 480. For Viollet-le-Duc architecture is the consequence of profound observation of the principles on which art can and must rest. The architect must seek these principles and deduce all of their consequences with rigorous logic.

32. Compare this passage from John Summerson's "Urban forms," in Handlin and Burchard, The Historian and the City, pp. 165-76: ". . . because I am disposed to condemn the kind of urban history which concentrates on architecture at the expense of total building output, such work may or may not be good architectural history but it is not the history of the city as an artefact. Our historian has to be on terms with the whole physical mass of marble, bricks and mortar, steel and concrete, tarmac and rubble, metal conduits and railsthe total artefact. He has to deal with all this and he has to deal with it within limits."

33. Berenson, The Italian Painters of the Renaissance (London: Phaidon, 1952), p. 10. The book consists of four essays published separately between 1894 and 1907. 34. Smailes, The Geography of Towns (London: Hutchinson Univ. Library, 1953; rev. ed., 1957), p. 103 of 1st edition. 35. Lavedan, Geographie des villes (cit. n. 20, chap. 1), pp. 91-92. The passage continues, "“This generating element is not necessarily the same as the one that generates the city. We have seen, for example, that many cities owe their origin to a spring; these springs almost never had an influence on the routings of roads; rather, they often were found outside of the actual agglomeration. Thus is the case with Cahors, the antique 'Divona Cadurcorum'; the spring that attracted the first inhabitants is as far from Roman Cahors as it is from the medieval or modern city. If Cahors is originally a city by a spring, its plan is that of a city on a thoroughfare the generating element of the plan corresponds to the element of growth, not to the element of the city's origin" (p. 92). 36 Georges Gusdorf, L'Université en question (Paris: Payot, 1964), p. 83.

37. Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques

(cit. n. 2, chap. 1), p. 126 of the English edi-
