> 来源：The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America\The architecture of the city (Oppositions books) -- Rossi, Aldo, 1931-1997, author, Eisenman, Peter, 1932- -- Oppositions books, America.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 3 The Individuality of Urban Artifacts; Architecture

1. Concerning the locus and theories of the division of space, see Maximilien Sorre, "Géographie urbaine et écologie" in Urbanisme et architecture (cit. n. 6, chap. 1); Sorre, Rencontres de la géographie et de la sociologie (Paris: Librairie Marcel Rivière & Ciè., 1957); Claude Lévi-Strauss, Tristes Tropiques (cit. n. 2, chap. 1); Marcel Mauss, "Essai sur les variations saisonnières des sociétés eskimos" (cit. n. 6, chap. 1). In this last study, Mauss comments upon how group names are often also place names, and how mut, the last syllable of Eskimo names, signifies “inhabitant of." In this way, primitive peoples were defined according to their territory: this man is the one from this mountain, from that river, etc. The meaning of this origin becomes clear in terms of the connecting of two points; the route then acquires a subjective value. See also Maurice Halbwachs, La topographie légendaire des Evangiles en Terre sainte. Etude de mémoire collective (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1941). The importance of this work was brought to light by Georges Friedmann in his preface to another work by Halbwachs; Friedmann emphasized how Halbwachs's study, although not conceived expressly with this in mind, comes on the heels of other great works, such as those of David Friedrich Strauss and Ernest Renan, dedicated to the problems of Christian origins. Friedmann's preface is in Halbwachs, Esquisse d'une psychologie des classes sociales (Paris: Librairie Marcel Rivière & Cie., 1955).

2. Eydoux, Monuments et trésors de la Gaule. Les récentes découvertes archéologiques (Paris: Plon, 1958; 2d ed., Union Génerale d'Editions, 1962). See esp. chap. 2, "Dieux, héros et artistes à Entremont, capitale de la confédération gauloise des Salyens." Also, Henri Paul Eydoux, Cités mortes et lieux maudits de France (Paris: Plon, 1959). The study of archaeological sites in Provence is of particular interest for urban studies because of the living presence of the monuments in these places and the quantity of material. In this respect the archaeological maps of Roman Gaul constitute a body of material that is of primary importance. See Institut de France, Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, Forma Orbis Romani. Carte archéologique de la Gaule Romaine (Paris: Ernest Leroux). Nos. I, II, IV, V, "Géographie urbaine et écologie"; Sorre, Rencontres de la géographie et de la sociologie; Willy Hellpach, Mensch und Volk der Grossstadt; all cit. supra. Also see my review “L'uomo della metropoli," Casabella-continuità, no. 258 (December 1961), pp. 22-25. Here, repeating a famous comment by Bismarck which Hellpach also cites (pp. 23-24), I wrote that in the Wilhelmian city, the immigrant enjoyed a certain, fully calculated measure of liberty, or at léast greater freedom than he had enjoyed in the countryside; this freedom also consisted in the fact that it was a form of city where certain structures or modes of growth were appropriate for the entire urban aggregate. Even if the preoccupation with the beautification and aggrandizement of the capitals often masked powerful forces of speculation, the resultant embellishment could at least in part be enjoyed by all the citizens. Moreover, this form of the bourgeois city had a meaning, and its citizens participated in its residential and administrative structures and its larger monumental projects; certainly the man of Hellpach's ¯metropolis could improve and refine his perceptions there, and the farmer of whom Bismarck spoke was able to walk under the lime trees on the wide streets and find a place to sit and "listen to a bit of music" and “down some beer." In regard to the polemics on the large bourgeois city, see also my discussion of Engels and Hegemann in chapter 4 of this book.

VI, and VII were published between 1931 and 1939; others were published after the war. Each map, at a scale of 1:200,000, includes several regions. For the study of urban development in Provence, see also Paul-Albert Février, Le développement urbain en Provence de l'époque romaine à la fin du XIVe siècle (Archéologie et histoire urbaine) (Paris: E. de Broccard, 1964).

3. Focillon, Vie des formes (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1933); Vie des formes. Editions nouvelle, suivie de l'éloge de la main (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1939); trans., The Life of Forms in Art (2d ed., New York: Wittenborn, Schultz, 1948). The concept expressed in the quotation can be taken in very general terms as the basis of Focillon's scientific work. See also Focillon, Art d'occident. Le Moyen Age roman et gothique (Paris: Armand Colin, 1938). Focillon commented in the preface, "Qur work is then not an initiation, nor an archaeological handbook, but a history, that is, a study of the relations, different according to time and place, that are established between facts, ideas, and forms, the latter of which cannot simply be considered to have ornamental value. They participate in historical activity; they represent the parabola which they have vigorously helped to delineate. Medieval art is not a natural concretion, nor the passive expression of a society; in large measure the Middle Ages themselves are its creation."

4. Jacob Burckhardt, Weltgeschichtliche Betrachtungen (Stuttgart: Alfred Kröner, 1963); trans., Force and Freedom: Reflections on History (New York: Pantheon, 1943), p. 318.

5. Loos, Trotzdem. Gesammelte Aufsätze 1900-1930 (Innsbruck: Brenner, 1931).The quotation is from the 1910 "Architektur," one of the writings in the book. Trotzdem is one of the two books that Loos published during his lifetime and is a compilation of his articles, lectures, and other writings; the second is Ins Leere gesprochen. Aufsätze in Wiener Zeitungen und Zeitschriften aus den Jahren 1897-1900 (Paris: Georges Crès, 1921; 2d ed. rev., Innsbruck: Brenner, 1932). Both books are republished in the first volume of the collected writings, Adolf Loos, Sämtliche Schriften (Vienna-Munich: Herold, 1962), ed. Franz Glück. For a bibliography and evaluation of Loos's work with respect to the theses of this book, see Aldo Rossi, "Adolf Loos. 1870-1933," Casabella-continuità, no. 233 (November 1959), pp. 5-12, 23, republished in Aldo Rossi, Scritti scelti. . . , pp. 78-106.

6. Hugo, Notre-Dame de Paris, in Oeuvres completes de Victor Hugo (Paris: Albin

Michel-Ollendorf, 1904; trans., Boston: Estes and Lauriat, n.d.). The quotation from the novel, first published in 1832, is from Bk. III, chap. 1, p. 170 of the English edition. See also n. 12 to this chapter.

7. Laborde, Les Monuments de la France classés chronologiquement et considérés sous le rapport des faits historiques et de l'étude des arts, 2 vols. (Paris, 1816-36). The passage quoted is from vol. I, p. 57.

8. Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, L'Architecture considerée sous le Rapport de l'Art, des Moeurs et de la Législation (Paris, 1804). See also the second and posthumous edition, L'Architecture de Claude-Nicolas Ledoux (Paris: Lenoir, 1847).

9. Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné . . . , cit.n. 9, chap.2. The description of the Gaillard Castle is in vol. III, pp. 82-102. The castle, near Andelys, was built by Richard the Lionhearted. The construction of this fortress, the gateway to Normandy, was directed against the offensives of the kings of France. The castle-fortress is a complete system of defense works on the Seine at a point where the river is able to protect Rouen from an army coming from Paris. Its strategic disposition proved to be extraordinary, especially during the struggles between England and the French kings. Viollet-le-Duc gave much consideration to this aspect, referring to the work of A. Deville, Histoire du château Gaillard et du siège qu'il soutint contre Philippe-Auguste, en 1203 et 1204 (Rouen: E.Frère, 1929; 1st ed., 1849).

10. Albert Demangeon, Problèmes de Géographie humaine (Paris: Armand Colin, 1952). See in particular, "L'habitation rurale en France. Essai de classification des principaux types," pp. 261-87; first published in Annales de Géographie, XXIX, no. 161 (September 15, 1920), pp. 352-75. The book, published posthumously for the first time in 1942, is a collection of Demangeon's writings which for the most part had already appeared in Annales de Géographie.

11. Le Corbusier, Manière de penser l'Urbanisme (Paris: Editions de l'Årchitecture d'Aujourd'hui; rev. ed., Editions Gonthier, 1963); François de Pierrefeu and Le Corbusier, La maison des hommes (Paris: Plon, 1942).

12. On Hugo and architecture, a splendid study addressing all the relationships between nineteenth-century culture and architecture has recently appeared in France: Jean Mallion, Victor Hugo et l'art architectural (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962).

13. The relationship between man and the environment. See Maximilien Sorre,

14. Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City, cit. n.5, chap.1

15. Chastel, Art et Humanisme à Florence au temps de Laurent le Magnifique. Etudes sur la Renaissance et l'Humanisme platonicien (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1959).

16. Paul Fréart Sieur de Chantelou, "Journal du voyage du Cavalier Bernini en France," Gazette des Beaux Arts (Paris), published periodically 1883-85; republished as an extract (Paris, 1815); trans. into Italian by Stefano Bottari, Bernini in Francia (Rome: Edizioni della Bussola, 1946).

17. Concerning the revolutionary architects, see the work of Emil Kaufmann: Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier. Ursprung und Entwicklung der autonomen Architektur (Leipzig-Vienna: Dr. Rolf Passer, 1933); Three Revolutionary Architects. Boullée, Ledoux and Lequer (Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society, 1952); Architecture in the Age of Reason. Baroque and Post-Baroque in England, Italy, and France (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1955). On the coinage of the term revolutionary architects, and developing a contrary thesis, see the work of Hans Sedlmayr, Die Revolution der modernen Kunst (Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1955); Verlust der Mitte, Die bildende Kunst des 19 und 20 Jahrhunderts als Symptom und Symbol der Zeit (Salzburg: Otto Müller, 1948). For a broad evaluation of these theses, see my studies: Aldo Rossi, "Emil Kaufmann e l'architettura del'Illuminismo," Casabella-contin uità, no. 222 (November 1958), pp. 42-47; "Una critica che respingiamo,"asabellacontinuità, no. 219 (May 1958), pp. 32-35; both republished in Scritti scelti. . . An indispensable analysis of these works and general critical evaluation is that of Louis Hautecoeur, Histoire de l'architecture classique,cit.n.11,chap.1.Foranevaluation of the relationship between the arts and the sciences in France during the Revolution, see Joseph Fayet,La Révolution française et la science. 1789-1795 (Paris: Marcel Rivière & Cie., 1960).

18. André Chastel, Art et Humanisme à Florence, p. 148; Rudolf Wittkower, Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism (Londón: Warburg Institute, 1949; 2d ed., Alec Tiranti, 1952).

19. Chastel, Art et Humanisme à Florence, p

20. It is well known that the central plan is one of the classic themes of the history of architecture. In the case of San Lorenzo in Milan, which is also an extraordinary urban artifact and an exceptional object of permanence in a city where the urban dynamic has been extremely strong, architecture and history together constitute the church's image. This image is linked with the collective idea that the city has of its monuments. Following are a series of essential works for an understanding and analytical study of this monument: Aristide Calderini, La zona monumentale di San Lorenzo in Milano (Milan: Ceschina, 1934); Julius Kohte, Die Kirche San Lorenzo in Mailand (Berlin: Ernst und Korn, 1890); Gino Chierici, "Un quesito sulla basilica di San Lorenzo," in Palladio. Rivista di storia dell'architettura, II, no. 1 (1938), pp. 1-4; Fernand de Dartein, Etude sur l'Architecture lombarde et sur les origines de l'Architecture romano-byzantine, 2 vols. (Paris: Dunod, 1865-82; reprinted Milan: Grafiche Mariani Ritti, 1963, under the direction of Novindustria di Mario Botti); Eberhard Hempel, Francesco Borromini (Vienna: Anton Schroll & Co., 1924); Henry de Geymüller, Les projets primitifs pour la Basilique de Saint-Pierre de Rome par Bramante, Raphael Sanzio, Fra-Giocondo, les Sangallo, etc., publiés pour la première fois in fac-simile avec des restitutions nombreuses et un texte, 2 vols. (Paris: J. Baudry, and Vienna: Lehmann et Wentzel, 1875-80). Aymo"Anai dell elazio z zue, n apTe e un Th y  phe n Rome and the Roman Forum see he ollowig works Ferdinando Castag noli, Carlo Cecchelli, Gustavo Giovannoni, and Mario Zocca, Topografia eurbanistica di Roma (Bologna: Licinio Cappelli, 1958); Jeröme Carcopino, La vie quotidienne a Rome à l'apogee de lempire (Paris: Hachette, 1939); Leon Homo, Rome impériale et l'urbanisme dans l'antiquité aris: Albin Michel, 1951 Giuseppe Lugli, Roma antica. Il centro monumentale (Rome: Giovanni Bardi, 1946); Ludovico Quaroni, "Una città eterna— quattro lezioni da ventisette secoli," in Urbanistica, Roma città e piani(Turin, n.d.), pp. 5-72; enlarged and republished in Quaroni, Immagine di Roma (Bari: Laterza, 1969;2d ed. 1976); Pietro Romanelli, Il foro romano (Bologna: Licinio Cappelli, 1959). Of exceptional interest for information about Roman artifacts seen as part of a continuum, and concerning the emergence of urban artifacts, see Quaroni's work, for example this passage on p 1:"What interests us most, however, is that the pomoerium was the boundary of the city in terms of building, the boundary, we would say, of the developmental plan and of the building code; these had no value outside of it since the city was considered to terminate beyond this point. For economy of defense, distance, and administration, it was understood as a zone of continuous building, as restricted as possible. Naturally, nothing stopped the poorest segment of the population, those who did not enjoy all the rights of citizenship, among other things, from building their illegal barrache outside the pomoerium; the continentia accounted for vast villages, just as do the bidonvilles and illegal and semi-rural suburbs that proliferate today around Rome, where the low price of land and the presence of easy means of communication favor settlement." From an analytical standpoint such as this, Rome, and especially Imperial Rome, with its defects, abuses, and contradictions, ends up as an image strangely akin to that of the large modern city. Further on Quaroni insists upon the relationship between the Roman principle of administration and of construction and the concrete conditions of life in Rome, a relationship that characterized the persistence of original characteristics and their mixture with more heterogeneous imbardia . . . (of 1844)the "model of regional anthropogeography, even today unsurpassed in Italy" (pp. I-XXXI, republished in Salvemini, Opere, vol. II: Scritti sul Risorgimento [Milan: Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, 1961], pp. 371-92). See also Croce's judgment; he saw it as a rift in Italian history ("Cattaneo did not write a history of Italy, but offered a 'rift' in Notizie naturali e civili della Lombardia . . . [sic], which for their admirable objectivity hardly seem to have been written just a few years before 1848"). Benedetto Croce, Storia della storiografia italiani nel secolo decimonono, 2 vols. (4th ed., Bari: Laterza, 1964), vol. I, p. 211.

ported elements. A major and systematic study of the urban vicissitudes of Rome by way of the enormous analytical material that is available would certainly be of fundamental value to the urban sciences.

23. Virgil, Aeneid, Bk. VIII, 11. 359-60. The Carinae were located on the Esquiline hill, where one of the richest and most monumental quarters of Augustan Rome rose; Rosa Calzecchi Onesti notes that they were located "on the small elevation where S. Pietro in Vincoli sits today and in the valley below." See Calzecchi's translation and introduction of Eneide (Turin: Giulio Einaudi, 1967).

24. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, Bk. V, chap. LV.

25. Aristotle, Politics (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1962), Bk. VII, p. 593.

26. Pietro Romanelli, Il foro romano, p. 26

27. Marcel Poète, Introduction à l'urbanisme, p. 368.

29. Domenico Fontana, Della trasportatione dell'Obelisco Vaticano . . . , Bk. I, p. 101; cited by Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture (cit. n. 22, chap. 2), p. 93.

30. Giedion, op. cit., p. 93.

31. Ibid., pp. 96-98.

32. Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand, Précis des leçons d'architecture .. ., vol. I, p. 17 (cit. n. 9, chap. 1). See also, Durand, Partie graphique des cours d'architecture faits à l'Ecole' Royale Polytechnique depuis sa réorganisation, précédée d'un sommaire des leçons relatives à ce nouveau travail (Paris, 1821), as well as Aymonino's references to Durand in the texts cited n. 12, chap. 1.

33. Carlo Cattaneo, La città considerata come principio ideale delle istorie italiane (Milan, 1858); ed. G. A. Belloni (Florence: Vallecchi, 1931); republished as La Città, ed. G. Titta Rosa (Milan-Rome: Valentino Bompiani, 1949); and included in the complete works, Carlo Cattaneo. Scritti storici e geografici, 4 vols., ed. Gaetano Salvemini and Ernesto Sestan \_(Florence: Felice Le Monnier, 1957), vol. II, pp. 384- 487. Salvemini, in his introduction to La più belle pagine di Carlo Cattaneo scelte da G. Salvemini (Milan, 1922), calls Cattaneo's Notizie naturali e civili su la Lom-

34. Cattaneo, La città considerata . . . , in Scritti storici e geografici, vol. II, p. 391.

35. Ibid., p. 416.

36. Ibid., p. 387.

37. Ibid., p. 396.

38. Ibid., p. 386.

39. Ibid., p. 406.

40. Ibid., p. 421.

41. Gramsci, Quaderni del carcere, 3: Il Risorgimento (Turin: Giulio Einaudi, 1964). The quotation is from the paragraph on Quintino Sella, pp. 160-61. Concerning the debate on Rome as capital, see Alberto Caracciolo's beautiful book, Roma capitale. Dal Risorgimento alla crisi dello stato liberale (Rome: Edizioni Rinascita, 1976); and Italo Insolera, Roma moderna. Un secolo di storia urbanistica (2d ed., Turin: Giulio Einaudi, 1962). Caracciolo reports parts of Cavour's speech of March 25, 1861, where the Piedmontese maintained that Rome was “the only Italian city that did not have exclusively municipal [local] memories" (p. 20). See also the passage on pp. 10-11 of Caracciolo's book: “"In the national movement, Rome was above all a unifying force of extraordinary moral power. If there was a common tradition to be found in the entire peninsula, it was called Rome. No study of the origins of Italian national consciousness can fail to take into account the magnetic attraction of this name over the centuries. Every time an attempt has been made to recover a unity in the history of Italy, one has had to return, by one route or another, to this point. The power of ancient Rome and the authority of Papal Rome are the characteristic elements that determine and almost fill up by themselves the history of Italy over two millenia. Every active force in the peninsula must reckon with the religious, political, and moral power summarized in the name of this city. . . . Again at the dawn of the Risorgimento, the name of Rome appears frequently, as much with the neo-Guelphs as with liberal and democratic laymen, because the problem of the

Church is always there, and it is such as to condition the success of every instance of unification and renewal. One can attempt to destroy it, or put it in the background, or neutralize it, but in no case can this decisive entity in Italy be ignored.

42. P. 132 (cit. n. 3, chap. 1).

43. Jacob Burckhardt, Force and Freedom (cit. n. 4, chap. 3), p. 163.

44. Karoly Kerényi, Die Mythologie der Gricchen, Die Gotter- und Menschheitgeschichten (Zurich: Rhein-Verlag, 1951); Die Heroen der Griechen (Zurich: Rhein-Verlag, 1958); trans. H. J. Rose, The Heroes of the Greeks (London: Thames and Hudson, 1959). The passage cited is from the English edition, p. 213. See also, Carl Gustav Jung and Karl Kerényi, Einführung in das Wesen der Mythologie (Zurich: Rascher, 1941); trans. R. F.C. Hull, Essays on a Science of Mythology (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1951). I would have liked to explore some of the ramifications of Kerényi's work on the concept of locus and on the significance of the origin of urban artifacts. However, in addition to its being beyond the scope of this study, a research effort of this type would demand years of work and the availability of a vast quantity of analytical material. In his Science of Mythology Kerényi investigates the founding of cities, as this subject continually touches on his work on the gods and heroes of Greece; he sheds light on both the multiplicity and the originality which constitute cities and also on the significance of the founder of the city as well as of its original design. "It is not only the psychologist who finds tri- and quadripartite [systems existing] together. Ancient traditions know the importance of the number three in city plans, in Etruria as in Rome itself: they tell of three towers, three streets, three quarters, three temples or tripartite temples. We cannot but observe a multiplieity even when we seek the singular and the shared: this is the nature of the original. And this already implies at the least an answer to the question of whether it is worthwhile to inquire into the particular origin of different local and chronological formations."

45. Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, in Marx-Engels Werke (Berlin: Dietz, 1961), vol. 13. The passage is from the introduction which Marx wrote between August and September of 1857. English version in Karl Marx, On History and People, vol. 7 of The Karl Marx Library, ed. Saul K. Padover (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977), pp. 79-80. 4 Marcel Poète, Introduction à l'Ur banisme (cit. n. 18, chap. 1), p. 232. 47. Carlo Cattaneo, La città con-

siderata...inScrittistoriciegeografici vol. II, pp. 384-85.

48. Ibid., p. 386.

49. Ibid., pp. 386-87.

50. Poète, Introduction à l'Urbanisme, p. 215

51. Roland Martin, L'urbanisme dans la Grece antique (Paris: A. & J. Picard, 1956 2d ed. enlarged, 1974).
