> 来源：Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu)\Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 6. Cultural Goodwill

l . The opinions expressed on music only have to be compared with the knowledge of works for it to be seen that a high proportion ( two-thirds ) of those who choose the most 'distinguished' answer ( 'All music of qual i ty i nterests me' ) have l i ttle knowledge of classical m usic.

2. D. Barnes, Nightwood, 2nd ed. ( London, Faber, 1950 ) , pp. 2 1 -24.

3. J. Frank, The Widening Gyre ( Bloomington and London, I ndiana University Press, 1963 ) , p . 6.

4. Like the very content of these products ( with, for example, their conspicuous references ro legitimate works ) , the advertising for middle-brow cultural goods is a permanent encouragement to cultural allodoxia. I t emphasizes both the economic and cultural accessibiliry of the products offered and also their high legitimacy, by invoking cultural authori ties ( e.g., Academicians or prize j u ries) whose authority is i tself an allodoxia effect, since the recognition it is given tends to vary in inverse ratio to competence.

5. Similar defence mechanisms in which the consumers make themselves the accomplices of the vendors are also found in other areas. Thus a market research specialist suggests that one of the most important functions of advertising may be ro provide purchasers with arguments to reassure themselves after the purchase; J. F. Engel, 'The Influence of Needs and Attitudes on the Perception of Persuasion' in S. A. Greyser, ed., Toward Scientific Marketing ( Chicago, American Marketing Association, 1964 ) , pp. 1 8-29. These ideological mechanisms of reassurance explain the disparity between the agents' own evaluation of their cultural practices and the objective truth of these practices. Everything takes place as if, at all levels of the hierarchy of degrees of consecration, agents were always inclined ro attribute more value to their practices than the structure of the field objectively confers on them.

6. Thus there is no need ro invoke censorship or 'political complicity' ( although this is not unknown ) ro explain why the most typically academic products, and also the most typically middle-brow products, have derived considerable reinforcement from television. Partly through the economic effect of the publicity supplied by television and the corresponding changes in publishing and marketing strategies, this tends to modify the relations between the field of restricted production and the field of large-scale production.

7 . Fel ix in Barnes's Nightwood (p. 24 ) shares this taste for oddities: 'Conversan t with edicts and laws, fol k srory and heresy, taster of rare wines, thumber of rarer books and old wives' tales-tales of men who became holy and of beasts that became damned-read in all plans for fortifications and bridges, given pause by all graveyards on all roads, a pedant of many churches and castles, his mind dimly and reverently reverberated to Madame de 5evigne, Goethe, Loyola and Brantome.'

8. I t is no accident that surveys on cultural practices and opinions tend to take the form of an examination in which the respondents, who are and always feel measured against a norm, obtain results that are ranked in accordance with their degree of scholastic consecration and express preferences which always correspond fairly closely to their educational Gualifications, both in their con tent and in their modal ity.

9. The image which the formally educated have of the self-educated is a fine example of the partial, sel f-interested truths produced by the partial l ucidity of ordinary perception and of the ( unconscious ) strategies through which each art of living is reinforced in its conviction of its own excellence by comparing itself flatteringly with other arts of living.

10. Need it be said that these two celebrated examples are chosen so as to invite the reader to reason a fortiori ?

1 1 . Ferdinand Cheval ( 1 836- 1 924 ) , a rural postman, built his ' Ideal Palace' singlehanded, from 1879 to 1 9 1 2 , with stones which he collected on his round and carried back to his home at Hauterives ( Drome ) . This ex traordinary 'monument' ( classified as such by Malraux when Minister of Cul ture) includes all the features mentioned in the text, and more. La Veillee del Chaumiem was a magazine which brought serialized historical romances ( accompanied by engravings) ro a mainly peasant readership. ( Translator's note. )

1 2 . 'Though the Wei Bodhisattvas and those of Nara, Kh mer and Javanese sculpture and Sung painting do not express the same communion with the cosmos as does a Romane5<jue tympanum, a Dance of Siva or the horsemen of the Parthenon, all alike express a communion of one kind or another, as does even Rubens in The Kermme. We need but glance at any Greek masterpiece to see at once that its triumph over the mystery-laden East does nor stem from any process of the reasoning mind, but from "the innumerable laughter of the waves". Like a muted orchestra the surge and thunder, already so remme, of ancient tragedy accompanies bur does not drown Antigone'S immortal cry.' A. Malraux, The Voim o[ Silence, crans. S. Gilbert ( London, Secker and Warburg, 1954 ) , pp. 635-636.

1 3 . They are by Ferdinand Cheval, among the inscriptions on his Ideal Palace ( translator ) .

1 4 . See P. Benichou, Le lacre de f'icrivain ( Paris, Jose Corti, 197 3 ) , pp. 1 77-178.

1 5 . Harpagon: Mol iere's Miler; Arnolphe: the protagonist o f his Ecole del [emmel, obsessed by marital infidel ity ( translator) .

16. Attributed to the pol i tician Edouard Herriot ( t ranslator ) .

1 7 . What i s said here about the middle positions ( because it i s most obvious i n this case ) is, of cou rse, CG ually true of all positions in social space-time.

18. C. Baudelot, R. Establet and J. Malemort, La petite bourgeoisie en France ( Paris, Maspero, 1 974 ) , p. 1 5 3 .

19. Among t h e properties of the strongly predetermined posi tions in the civil service ( such as those of the j unior administrative executives) the most significant from the point of view considered here is undoubtedly the fact that they offer, through their guaranteed career-structures, the assurance of a relatively predictable individual trajectory.

20. The placement of these positions is understandable since their emergence is to a large extent due to changes in the educational system.

2 1 . The example of the craftsmen provides a good opportunity to re-emphasize that, in treating as a point what is in fact a space ( and sometimes a genuine field ) , one inevitably simplifies. This simplification is entailed by the endeavour to grasp the social space as a whole ( and so to avoid the errors almost inevi tably incu rred, as a direct conseGuence of autonomization, by monographs devoted to a particular 'occupation' ) .

2 2 . Some 19.5 percent of all the 'junior executives' ( administrative executives, technicians, primary teachers) and 20.3 percent of the office workers are enrolled in a l ibrary ( as against 3.7 percent of the commercial employees and 2 . 2 percent of the small employers) ; 18.5 percent and 1 2.9 percent respectively collect stamps ( as against 3.7 percen t and 2.8 percent ) ; 1 4 . 2 percent and 1 0 . 3 percent follow correspondence courses or evening classes ( as against 0 percent and 2 percent ) ( C.S. I V ) .

2 3 . The notion of 'preference' in legitimate culture is only appropriate at and above a certain level of competence ( corresponding approximately to a certificate of secondary education ) . This is seen clearly in the fac t that, below this level , the respondents treat questions of preference as questions of knowledge, saying they prefer the painters they know, and that the proportion of respondents who know more or as many composers as the number of works they say they know rises with level of education, while the most cultivated respondents refuse to acknowledge value in some of the works they know.

24. The office workers, especially the youngest ones, who have seen a high proportion of the films mentioned ( 3 . 5 on average, compared with 2 .4 for the skilled manual workers and foremen, 2.3 for the craftsmen and small shopkeepers) , are more interested in actors than directors ( on average they name 2.8 actors and only 1 director, and often name the actors in films they have not seen ) . So if they had seen Visconti's Rocco and His Brothers more than any other category, it was probably because of the stars, Annie Girardot and Alain Delon.

25. The distinctive feature of the constellation of choices of the techn icians ( who, as a whole, occupy the positions closest to the cent re of gravity ) l ies in the fact that they read many more scientific or technical books and more often go in for photography and home movies.

26. This law plays an important role in determining the choice of an artistic career rather than a less risky career ( o r vice versa) and, among the artistic careers, the choice of those which, at the moment in question, are the most risky ( genre, manner etc. ) .

27. Another indication of the ambiguous posi tion of the socio-medical services may be seen in the fact they are much more fam iliar with the smart sports than the other members of the middle classes ( for example, only 4 1 .6 percent of [hem say they have never played tennis, as against 70.4 percent of the primary teachers; for skiing, the corresponding figures are 4 l .6 percent and 78.5 percent ) .

28. The commercial j unior executives and the secretaries, who have slightly less cultural capital than the members of the socio-medical services, make more disparate choices. They are interested in the films favoured by the working classes or the small employers ( The Longest Day, The Magnificent Seven, Vice and Virtue ) , more than the teachers and the socio-medical services, while also being in terested in the favourite films of the latter ( Salvatore Giuliano, The Trial, Les dimanches de Ville d'Avray ) .

29. This pursuit of conformity to the i deal of distinction is revealed in the combined choice of 'pot-luck' meals and 'original and exotic' meals--'Iittle Chinese restaurants'--{)r in series such as Fran<;oise Hardy, Buffet, Van Gogh, which may be combined with the teachers' Kandinsky or the professionals' Concerto for the Left Hand.

30. This is tcue despi te the fac t that p rovincials may rel y on magazi nes for a substitute for what they would derive from residence in Paris, i.e., that sense of being 'where the action is' which is the real basis of cul t u ral flair or chu tzpah ( this i s perhaps the chief function of La Nouvel Observateur ) .

3 l . Because the opportunities offered by the cultural environment are most profitably exploited by those with the highest cultural capital, and because the conformityinducing pressu res of the group on its members also rise with c u l t u ral capital, the gaps between the Parisians and the provincials become more pronounced at higher levels of education .

3 2 . Georges Perec's novel Les choses ( Paris, Jull iard, 1965 ) captures in its own way the relationship which a couple of these mystified mystifiers ( social psychologists working i n a market research agency) entertain with things whose whole value lies in the words used about them.

33. See M. Villette, 'La carriere d'un "cadre de gauche" apres 1968', Actes, 29 ( 1979 ) , 64-74.

34. One of the many determinants which incline the members of the new occupations to a sub·versive representation of the relations between the sexes is the fact that it is in the middle class-and especially, no doubt, its new fractions-that women most frequently have higher educational qualifications or occupational status than their husbands, and that the husbands' higher occupational statusgiven identical qualifications-is, no doubt, most resented.

35. Anticipating the point of view of the old morality on what can only be, in these terms, a sort of ' unthinkable', Kant writes: 'An obligation to enjoyment is a pat· ent absurdity. And the same, then, must also be said of a supposed obligation to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spi ritually this enjoyment be refined in thought ( or embellished), and even if it be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment.' I. Kant, The Critique of Judgement, trans. J. C. Meredith ( Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1952 ) , p. 48n.

36. M. Wolfenstein, 'The Emergence of Fun Morality' in E. Larrabee and R. Meyersohn, eds., Mass Leisure ( Glencoe, Ill. , Free Press, 1958 ) , pp. 86-97.

37. As readers of avant-garde film criticism well know, jouir/jouissance can be eroticized by playing on its colloquial meaning, 'to come' ( translator).

38. The endeavour to objectify a social ethic--especially a young and therefore aggressively imposed one-of course entails many dangers; lucidity may be no more than the effect of adherence to a contrary ethic. Each of the words used to characterize two antagonistic moralities can, of cou rse, function as insults for champions of the opposite morality; it is therefore futile to hope to find a perfectly 'neutral' tone ( the psychoanalytic vulgate, for example, will identify 'ascetic' with 'masochistic'). In each case, one would need to restore the experiential content of what is sociologically objectified ( e.g. , the heroic dimension of the ascetic striving for virtue, which takes its pleasure in effort and in the exaltation of self-transcendence, or the generous innocence of the liberationist cult, which is based on an acute sense of the absurdity of social constraints and stakes); and, as has constantly been done here, the dispositions described have to be referred to their conditions of production: repressive dispositions, for example, have to be seen as the product of repression ( or social regression).

39. If the opposition between politicization and psychologization is carried too far, i t may b e forgotten that participation i n a community of activists can also offer a solution to existential difficulties--even when these are not the exclusive reason for joining-by providing all the assurances and reassurances of immersion in an integrated, separate, self-contained group, with its own laws, language and ritual , demanding and recognizing devotion and sacrifice; see D. Mothe, Le metier de militant ( Paris, Seuil, 1973) . But reducing the logic of activism to that of group ther· apy may equally obscure the fact that psychological transactions, in particular the exchange of devotion and recognition ( 'the comrades' confidence'), are only the experiential ( but not on that account negligible) form of much deeper transac· tions between the 'total institution'-which, demanding total dependence, gives most to those who give it most of what they are and have outside of it-and its members, who give it most ( and receive most) when they expect most from it and have or are least outside of it.

40. See P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice ( Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1977) , pp. 92-93.

4 l . See N. Elias, The History of Mannm ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1978 ) , and State Formation and Civilization ( Oxford, Basil Blackwell , 1982 ) , vols. I and II of The Civilizing ProceJS.

42. Though with no more evidence than the observations of ordinary existence and the indirect indications provided by our survey, I am inclined to think that the devotees of the sects organized around the new forms of bodily exercise are mainly recruited among the women of the new petite bourgeoisie, and that the theme of the liberated body takes i ts place in a problematic with a strong religious colouring ( at least in its vocabulary ) which also includes the 'problems of the couple', 'women's liberation' etc.

43. It is no surprise that these people should be so horrified by every form of sociological objectification and so fascinated by psychological or psychoanalytical enchantment. Nor that they should be ready to applaud all the fashionable variants of the old personalist denunciation of scientific 'reductionism', the elementary form of intellectual aristocratism, which has received unexpected reinforcement from the identification of every attempt at scientific objectification of practices with an ethical, even political condemnation ( with the theme 'science = Gulag', which has enabled some well-worn post-Heideggerian fossils to make an unlooked-for come-back in the intellectual weeklies) . Nor that the existence of a scientific sociology is as improbable as ever in times when the position of sociologist is one of the refuges for those intent on escaping classification.

44. Celestin Freinet, educationalist ( ,active method' ) ; Carl Rogers, inventor of 'group dynamics'; Wilhelm Reich, psychoanalyst ( translator's note ) .

4 5 . See, for example, E . Dich ter, La strategie du desir: une philosophie de la vente ( Paris, Fayard, l%l ) .
