> 来源：Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu)\Distinction a social critique of the judgement of taste (Pierre Bourdieu).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 7. The Choice of the Necessary

1 . It is no accident that disregard of the habitus and its effects is common to all bourgeois visions of the people, from the conservative pessimism which naturalizes the properties produced by social conditions to the optimism of the idealist revolutionism which forgets that the working class is shaped by necessity, even in the form of i ts revolt against necessity.

2. Need i t be said that i t is not sufficient to originate from these classes in order to produce a true representation of their view of their social world--if only because self-distancing can presuppose or induce relationships towards these classes (such as populist evangelizing) as radically closed as the simple distance of lifelong outsiders ?

3. Norbert Elias relates ( ci ting Taine) a gesture by the Duc de Richelieu which shows that the art of spending without counting, which in the seventeenth century marked the distance between the aristocrat and the saving, profit-making bourgeois, just as it now marks the distance between the bourgeois and the petit bourgeois, may, in the limiting case of a class whose very existence depends on the reproduction of its social capital, be the object of an explicit lesson: 'The Duke gave his son a purse full of gold so that the young man would learn to spend it like a grand seigneur. When the young man brought the gold back unspent, his father seized the purse and, in front of his son, threw it out of the window.' N. Elias, Die hiifische Gesellschaft ( Darmstadt, Luchterhand, 1 97 5 ) , pp. 103- 1 04.

4. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology in Collected Works, V ( London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1 976) , 295.

5. Given that the amount of income devoted to food rises strongly in real terms, the proportions spent on other i tems decline relatively less, and the structure of expenditure remains much the same as that of skilled workers. Certain items nonetheless rise significantly: small household electrical equipment, maintenance and repairs, hairdressing and beauty care, telephone, books, newspapers and entertainments, school expenses, holidays ( C.S. I I I ) .

6. C. Roy, ' Les conditions de vie des menages, exploitation triennale, 1965 -66-67', Collections de I'lNSEE, ser. M, no. 30 ( December 1 97 3 ) .

7 . I t i s n o doubt the same 'real ism' which excludes from poli tical or union action everything which might give it a purely symbol ic air as regards the means used ( i n con trast to the exhibi tionism of stu den t demonstrat ions ) and especially the goals pursued.

8. The members of the working classes, like the members of domi nated ethnic groups, may make it a point of honour to belie the image that the dominant have of their class. Thus the working-class cult of cleanness or honesty ( 'poor but honest' ) , like some forms of conspicuous sob riety, no doubt owes something to the concern to bel ie bourgeois prej udice. The same intention of rehabili tation underlies the discourse designed to persuade onesel f that 'all we lack is money' ( and not taste) and that 'if we had the wherewithal, we'd know what to buy' ( or 'how to dress properly' ) .

9 . See P . Bourdieu e t aI . , Un art moyen: essal 5ur ieJ u5age5 Jociaux de fa photographie ( Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1 965 ) , pp. 5 4 -64.

10. See Y . Del saur, 'L'economie du l angage populaire', ActeJ, 4 ( 1 97 5 ) , 33-40

1 1 . This would explain the image that working-class women have of feminist demands.

1 2 . A whole set of indices tends to show that the working classes remain attached to a more strict moral ity in everything concerned with sex uality and the sexual division of labour. Thus, as regards cloth ing, while-no doubt for fu nctional reasons--they readily accept that women should wear trousers for work, they rej ect them much more often than the other classes at home and outside; similarly, thev always strongly disapprove of miniski rts, especially at work and ou tdoors ( Sondages, 1 ( 1 968} , 79 ) . Man ual workers and especially farm workers are less inclined ( 34 percent and 5 3 . 5 percent ) than j unior executives ( 57 percent ) and sen ior executives ( 59 percen t ) to say they attach no importance ro virginity; the proportion who consider that physical love has a fairly or very i mportant place in l i fe increases slightly as one moves up the social h ierarchy; conversely, the proportion who say they have only loved one person in their lives declines as one moves up the h ierarchy, as does the proportion who say one cannot love two people at the same time, or that love chiefly brings tenderness ( rather than, say, physical pleas u re ) , or that eroticism and infidel i ty destroy love ( C S. XLVI ) .

1 3. See H . Gournelle and A . Svakvary, 'Enquete sur Ie petit dejeuner en France', Annates d'Hygiene de Langue Fram;aise, 3 ( May-June 1967 ) , 28.

14. The reference to the division of labour between the sexes which connotes the representation of personal or collective identity ( for example, a manual worker, invited ro classify a set of occupations, put all the non-manual j obs i n a single class, saying, 'All pansies [ rous des pedes]!' ) evokes not so much the specifically sex ual dimension of practice as the virtues and capacities associated by status with the two sexes, i.e., strength or weakness, cou rage or cowardice, rather than potency or impotence, activi ty or passivity.

1 5 . This fact is underlined by the rapid devaluation of labour power which accompanies ageing.

16. See T. W. Adorno, 'On Popular Music', StudieJ in Philo5ophy and Social Science, 9 ( 1 94 1 ) . I t would be easy ro show, fo r example, that the most legit i mate music is used, through records and radio, no less passively and intermittently than 'popular' music, without thereby being discredi ted, and without being accused of the alienating effects that are attribu ted to popular music. As for repetitiveness of form, i t is greatest i n G regorian chant ( which nonetheless has a high disti nctive value ) , i n much mediaeval music now in favour, and in much seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 'diverti men to' music originally composed ro serve as 'background music'.

1 7 . 'In Sud-Ouest Dimanche of 8 August, you publish a photograph of a Renault 5 transformed into a four-seater convertible. An article subtitled "When a coachbuilder and a couturier get together to dress a car" presents the coach-builder Lohr as the author of the car. This is quite unttue. I am the one who had the idea of this version of the vehicle, I designed it for Cacharel , and I hold the artistic copyright. I personally supervised i ts creation in the coach-builder's workshop; his role was purely technical. So a more accurate subtitle would have been: "When an artist and a coutu rier get together to dress a car'" ( Reader's letter, Sud-Ouest Dimanche, 22 August 1976 ) .

1 8 . A peasant i n the Beam explained why he had not thought o f becoming mayor, although he had won the most votes in the local elections, by saying: 'But I don't know how to talk!'

19. I t would be i n teresting to determine, by a specifically l i nguistic analysis, precisely how this frontier is defined in the area of language. If one accepts the verdict of the i nterviewers' 'social sense', a good measu re not of the l i nguistic status of the language used by the respondents but of the social image which educated interlocu tors may have of it ( the taxonomies used to classify speech and pronu nciation are those of scholastic usage) , i t appears that this difference is in fact very marked between the manual workers ( and also the craftsmen and small shopkeepers ) and the clerical workers. Of the former, only 42 percent speak a French regarded as 'standard' (correct ) , as against 77 percent of the office workers ( to which must be added 4 percent of 'refined' [chatie ] speech, totally absent among the manual workers ) ; similarly, the proportion j u dged to have 'no accen t' rises from 1 2 . 5 percent to 28 percent.

20. Manual workers, the category who most often describe the ideal friend as 'bon vivant', are also those who most often-by far-say they are well-disposed towards someone who eats and drinks well ( 6 3 percent of them, as against 56 percent of the farmers and farm workers, 54 percent of the j unior executives and clerical workers, 50 percent of the shopkeepers and craftsmen, 48 percent of the employers, senior executives and professionals-C.S. XXXI V ) . In a similar vein, I have already noted the taste for everything which makes the 'atmosphere' of a show, and also a celebration, a meal, and for those who contribute to it; and also the strongly marked propensity to expect images to immortalize the 'good times' of life and the symbols of festivity.

2 1 . The 'career' available to manual workers is, no doubt, initially experienced as the opposite of the negative career which leads down into the sub-proletariat. What counts in 'promotion' is, together with financial advantages, the additional guarantees it gives against the ever present threat of fall ing back into insecurity and poverty. The potentiality of a negative career is as important in understanding the dispositions of skilled workers as is the poten tiali ty of promotion for clerical workers and j unior executives.

22. See G. Adam, F. Bon, J. Capdevielle and R. Mouriaux, L 'ouvrier jran(ais en 1 9 70 ( Paris, Armand Col in, 1 97 1 ) . ( The CGT is, of the three main l abour union organ izations, the one most closely l i n ked to a political party, the Com m unist Party, and strongest i n the traditional industries-translator. )

2 3 . Some 10.5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and 1 7 percent of the shopkeepers cite Rousseau among the painters, as against 6 percent of the skilled workers, 3 percent of the primary teachers and technicians and 0 percent of the j unior administrative executives. The name Brague, which is cited by 1 0 . 5 percent of the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and 4 percen t of the skilled workers, had become unusually prominent on radio and TV at the time of the survey, because the artist's death coincided with the survey period.

24. The effects of differences in age and differences in education combine to produce fairly marked differences in tastes in singers. The foremen and skilled workers tend to prefer the older, more established singers, but also those best placed in the hierarchy of cultural values--Piaf, Becaud, Brel , Brassens--whereas the semi-skilled and unskilled tend to prefer Johnny Hallyday and Fran<;oise Hardy.
