> 来源：The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Beauty of Irregularity

A coNsPICUous TREND IN MoDERN art movements is the pursuit of deformation, discarding conventional form, as an expression of man's quest for freedom. In referring to this avoidance of the regular in the widest sense, I shall speak here of "asymmetrical" or "irregular".

Although the contemporary accent is on deformation, expression, in both East and West, was always achieved by departing from regular form. The term "grotesque", which has an important—rather, a solemn -significance in aesthetic history, has unfortunately been misused and debased in modern times. All true art has, somewhere, an element of the grotesque. Thus the principal of irregularity, or departing from fixed form, is not new; it is merely that it has come to be employed consciously.

Why has this powerful phenomenon appeared? The irregular is in a sense something to which all who pursue true beauty resort. But primitive art from Africa, the Americas, and the South Seas was an astonishing revelation and had a magnetic effect on artists like Picasso and Matisse. Such art, as nothing else, freely expressed the beauty of deformation, of the irregular, that they sought. This resuscitation from primitive sources surely ranks with the revelation afforded by the colour prints of Japan in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Thus "irregular"' beauty is in no sense a new mode of expression; the characteristic of modern art, rather, is the fresh look it has taken at such beauty and the conscious emphasis it has placed on it. The profound truth in this emphasis is that freedom always resolves into irregularity in the end. "Free" beauty of necessity boils down to irregular beauty.

Among the earliest people consciously to appreciate this beauty of irregularity and take it as the principle underlying their creative work were the Tea masters of Japan who lived three or four centuries ago. This becomes clear immediately if one refers to the bowls used in the Tea ceremony, not one of which fails to show irregularity somewhere. Nothing, to put it the other way round, was selected for use in the Tea ceremony if it was perfect and regular. In this sense, the great masters of Tea may be considered as very modern. The so-called literati painting of the Southern school in China, so much prized in the past here and so little in the West, is also of this order of asymmetry, and the pity is that the young painters of Japan, engrossed as they are with the arts of the West, neglect their own Oriental inheritance.

In America of late years the potters in pursuit of "free form'' have made a sharp and deliberate turn towards asymmetry and deformation. But already two or three centuries ago in Japan a similar tendency and preoccupation took place in the making of Raku Tea-bowls and other wares. Also, the porcelain Tea-bowls made in Ming China to the order of Japanese Tea masters, of which many still survive, often show a deliberate irregularity that is essentially foreign to China. Such pieces are the result of conscious demand from the Japanese side and, as such, occupy a rather special place in the history of ceramics. My observation in America makes me think that most of the handmade individual craftsmen's pots now being produced are mainly influenced in their irregularity and deformation by Japanese Tea taste.

An attempt to describe this love of asymmetry in modern terms was made by Kakuz Okakura in his The Book of Tea. He calls it "the art of imperfection'. To a younger generation this may be easy to grasp. A glance at the implements of Tea will make this clear. The shapes are irregular, the surfaces dry or sandy, the glazes of uneven thickness; the pieces piled in the kiln remain unglazed where the pots rest upon one another; fire cracks are accepted. All these characteristics are not merely put up with, but are taken as an integral part of pot making and are therefore of potential beauty. The Tea masters found depth in this naturalness. Hence Okakura's phrase.

Why shouldone ejec the perfec in fvour  the pefc? The ec and perfect carries no overtones, admits of no freedom; the perfect is static and regulated, cold and hard. We in our own human imperfections ar repelled by the perfect, since everything is apparent from the start and there is o suggestion  the infinite. Beauty must have someroom, must be associated with freedom. Freedom, indeed, is beauty. The love of the irregular is a sign of the basic quest for freedom.

Dissatisfied with Okakura's theory, the Buddhist aesthetician Shin'ichi Hisamatsu put forward a new idea. He says that the imperfect does not, in itself, constitute beauty, the imperfect is merely a negative concept. True beauty in the Tea ceremony must be more positive. It must go further, to the point of positively rejecting the perfect. This idea certainly goes one step further than Okakura. For example, Hisamatsu's idea of rejecting the perfecis wellillustrated in the Raku Tea-bowls. The shape is deliberately deformed—by, for example, not using a wheel—and the surface is left rough. By such means the masters sought to give life back to beauty in the Tea ceremony. All such imperfections are now sought after and refined with deliberation. From the taste of the Tea masters, this custom spread into the design of all sorts of objects throughout Japan.

Can the beauty and truth established by the early masters of Tea be explained either by Okakura's "art of imperfection" or by Hisamatsu's standard of beauty based upon the negation of perfection as an ideal? I do not think so.

In a sense such ideas are the precursors of modern deformation and free form". Both ideas—of imperfection as a stage on the way to perfection and of the rejection of perfection—are only relative. Beauty in the Tea ceremony does not ultimately reside in imperfection in these senses. Rather, it should be seen in terms of mus, the Buddhist idea of unchanging formlessness behind all phenomena. In this, there is neither acceptance nor rejection.

True beauty in Tea cannot lie either in the perfect or the imperfect, but must lie in a realm where such distinctions have ceased to exist, where the imperfect is identified with the perfect. This is the beauty that I refer to, for want of a better word, as "irregular"—irregular not in the sense of being opposed to the regular, but simply that when one does not consciously aim at either there is always a little something left unaccounted for. For this reason I cannot describe the present craze for deliberate deformation in art as a path towards true beauty.

If I turn to those things that display real beauty, my meaning may become clear. A characteristic Korean bowl made in the Yi dynasty (Plate 58) or a Chinese tea-caddy of the Sung dynasty can be described as neither perfect nor imperfect. They come out of a world that existed before this dualism began-or rather, not "before or after', but in a world where the dualism is irrelevant. Neither of them were made for any Tea-rooms, or for any aesthetic reasons, but for ordinary daily use. Their slight irregularities came by chance and not by any deliberation. Skipping of glaze or other imperfection was quite fortuitous. If one visits a Korean country pottery, the mystery attached to the beauty of imperfection in the pots is solved; the whole process of throwing, turning, glazing, and firing partakes of this easy-going naturalness, rough perhaps, but beautiful and imperfect. The making of those pots is very free-—but not consciously free-and full to the brim with natural good taste.

I was favoured with a rare chance of visiting the Korean village where beautiful lathed wood objects are made. When I got there after a long, hard trip, I noticed at once by their workshop many big blocks of pine wood ready for the hand lathe. But to my great astonishment, all of them were still sap green and were by no means ready for immediate use. To my surprise, a Korean craftsman took one of them, set it in a lathe, and began forthwith to turn it. The pine block was so fresh that turning made a wet spray, which gave off a scent of resin. This perplexed me very much because it is against common sense in lathe work. So I asked the artisan, "Why do you use such green material? Cracks will come out pretty soon!"

"What does it matter?" was the calm answer. I was amazed by this Zen monklike response. I felt sweat on my forehead. Yet I dared to ask him, "How can you use something that leaks?" "Just mend it", was his simple answer.

With amazement I discovered that they mend them so artistically and beautifully that the cracked piece seems better than the perfect one. So they do not mind whether it cracks or not. Our common sense is of no use for Koreans at all. They live in a world of "thusness", not of "must or must not'. Their way of making things is so natural that any man-made rule becomes meaningless. They have neither attachment to the perfect piece nor to the imperfect. At the very moment when I got their unexpected answer, I came to understand for the first time the mystery of the asymmetrical nature of Korean lathe work (Plate 37). Since they use green wood, the wares inevitably deform in drying. So this asymmetry is but a natural outcome of their state of mind, not the result of conscious choice. That is to say, their minds are free from any attachment to symmetry as well as asymmetry. The deformation of their work is the natural resul  nonhalanceee from y restriction.Whydes Jp nese lathe work look hard and cold in comparison with Korean? Because we are attached to perfection, we want to make the perfct pice. But what is human perfection after all?

In modern art, deformation is so often emphasized and insisted upon. But what a difference from Korean deformation! The former is done purposely, the latter naturally. Korean work is but an uneventful, natural outcome of the people's state of mind, free from dualistic, man-made rules. They make their asymmetrical lathe work not because they regard asymmetrical form as beautiful or symmetrical as ugly, but because they make everything without such polarized conceptions. They are quite free from the conflict between the beautiful and the ugly. Here, deeply buried, is the mystery of the endless beauty of Korean wares. They just make what they make without any pretension.

The aim of the strenuous spiritual efforts of Zen monks is focused always on grasping "thusness", which is not yet separated into right and wrong, good and evil. The following story recorded in a book by a Zen monk may well illustrate what I want to make clear.

Once there were three people who took a walk in the country. They happened to see a man standing on a hill. One of them said, "I guess he is standing on a hill to search for lost cattle". "No", the second said, "I think he is trying to find a friend who has wandered off somewhere". Whereas the third said, "No, he is simply enjoying the summer breeze". As there was no definite conclusion, they went up the hill and asked him. "Are you searching for strayed cattle?""No", he replied. "Are you look ing for your friend?" "No," again. "Are you enjoying the cool breeze?" No, yet again."Then why are you standing on the hill?""I am just standing", was the answer.

The state of mind of just being or "thusness"' is not confined in any preconception.

The beauty I call "irregular", the Tea masters describe as "rough". I would call attention to the quite extraordinary perspicacity of those old Tea masters in grasping this quality so firmly. A certain love of roughness is involved, behind which lurks a hidden beauty, to which we refer in our peculiar adjectives shibui, wabi, and sabi. Tea-bowls are not a project of the intellect. Yet their beauty is well defined, which is why it has been referred to both as the beauty of the imperfect and the beauty that deliberately rejects the perfect. Either way, it is a beauty lurking within.

It is this beauty with inner implications that is referred to as shibui. It is not a beauty displayed before the viewer by its creator; creation here means, rather, making a piece that will lead the viewer to draw beauty out of it for himself. In this sense, shibui beauty, the beauty of the Tea ceremony, is beauty that makes an artist of the viewer.

The existence of such adjectives, the more precise meaning of which I have tried to describe elsewhere, is an indication of the unique attention that has been given in these islands to depth in matters of taste. These adjectives come out of a background of Zen thinking and have a pervasive religious flavour of modesty, restraint, and inwardness. They describe an aesthetic based upon simple naturalness and reverence. This does not imply an implacable opposition to wealth and its expression in taste so much as an emphasis upon the treasury of the humble minded. The shibui quality is the very skin of mu ("void'), its outward form. Thus it may be seen that the beauty discovered in our rooms of Tea, hiding so discreetly behind irregularity, is the very opposite of that beauty unrobed by the Greeks.

For two thousand years or more Greece has dominated European art, hence the great antithesis between East and West in matters of beauty. In the field of ceramics, Western pots are almost always decorated with pattern. The beauty of the plain pot was almost unperceived, and shapes were rooted in symmetry. The ideal of Greek beauty hardly permits of irregularity or asymmetry, for it was founded upon the symmetry of the human body. By contrast the Oriental found irregular beauty in nature outside the human form. From another angle, Western man may be said to be rational and Eastern man irrational; the scientific thinking of Europe is founded in rational thought. In the East the foundation is in the heart and its inspiration, which to the Western mind, with its emphasis upon the intellect, must appear very strange, for Eastern man jumps to his conclusions on wings of intuition, whereas Occidental man arrives at his by a steady progression of intellectual steps. From this causation, man of the West brought about the age of the machine, while the man of the East is still largely dependent upon the hand.

Being founded upon nature, the quality of beauty inculcated by the early masters in the Tea-rooms of Japan was a release into healthy normality, into a freedom without overtones of wilful artistry. The implements of Tea had no overstressed individualism about them. In that respect they were utterly different from objects made today by artistcraftsmen in search of self-expression, although there is a superficial likeness. They are different, to, from the things favoured by the later men of Tea, who had lost their freedom in the search for formulas. Such deformations as they contain were born, not made, unlike the kind of distortion that is current today. Their oddness was unplanned. Conteorary ree formis wilful and unfree. In fact it can be said that t pursuit of freedom has led to prison gates—the prison of self.

Perhaps the best way of explaining this is by a comparison of the early and later implements of Tea. The former came from either China or, more particularly, Korea. They had an enormous influence upon Japanese taste, and Japanese craftsmen began to imitate them, mainly under the patronage of the later masters. Art historians have praised and still praise these Japanese crafts; I cannot agree. The implements of Tea made in Japan in this way cannot be compared with those from abroad. The irregularity apparent in both is in fact quite different. They are entirely different in motivation. The difference is between things born and things made. A comparison between the Korean Ido bowls and the Japanese Raku Tea-bowls is sufficient to make this quite clear. The Raku bowls were made with deliberate effort, the Korean bowls were effortless products of daily living and were not even intended for Tea. In theory the Japanese bowls might have been expected to be better, but in actuality the Korean are far better. The reason for this is clear if one considers which follows more faithfully the Zen warning to "avoid the artificial". Even in one of the most renowned Raku Tea-bowls, the famous "Fuji" by Honami Köetsu, this forced quality of taste is not entirely eradicated. Although things made with the motive of taste may charm for a time, one gets tired of them. Raku is not really freedom but captivity, not really "absence of conceptualization" but its result.

The approach to the making of better Raku Tea-bowls would necessitate a complete reversal of thinking. Really good artists and craftsmen are aware of this dilemma, but even they have not escaped from it. To do so is immensely difficult so long as one follows the path of jiriki (salvation through one's own efforts) rather than the tariki (abandonment of attempts at self-reliance; reliance on "grace") that produced the Korean bowls. This is the only way, hard though it be, for the artist, or for the craftsman who is also an artist. In his greater range and awareness he has to strive and strive to the very end to achieve that real freedom where his path joins that of the simple, natural traditional craftsman of whom I have written so much. "Free form" activity is the equivalent of the deformed Raku Tea-bowl; both suffer from the same sickness, which has to be cured by a complete reversal of thinking. I believe that the early concept of Tea, if properly understood, contains force and truth enough to bring about this transformation. The beauty of irregularity-which in its true form is actually liberated from both regularity and irregularity the asymmetric principle contains the seed of the highest form of beauty known to man.

1954
