> 来源：The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Buddhist Idea of Beauty

There Is A Tremendous Difference between the nature of God as conceived by Christians and that of the Buddha as conceived by Buddhists. God is an absolute being, distinct from that finite being called man; God is creator, man created. It is thus a fundamental characteristic of Christian philosophy to perceive the existence of God as independent from man. Some link, consequently, is required to connect these two different entities, and this link is to be found in the person of Jesus Christ. The cross symbolizes the belief that Jesus performed his difficult task at the cost of his life.

The Buddha, on the other hand, is not a creator: as is suggested by his name, he is a man who has achieved Enlightenment. Every human being, according to Buddhism, may become a Buddha; everyone is primordially qualified to do so. Of those who have achieved Buddhahood, Shakyamuni is the perfect example; all adherents of Buddhism, therefore, aspire to follow in his footsteps. Conceiving of no god apart from man, Buddhists instead suppose the existence of the Law (Logos). Although the Law may sometimes be referred to anthropomorphically, its character is far different from that of the Christian God: the manifestation of the Law is the essential property of man. Thus, by the Buddha may be understood a man in whom the Law has been realized.

What, then, is Enlightenment? It is the state of being free from all duality. Sometimes the term "Oneness" is used, but" Non-dual Entirety" (funi) is a more satisfactory term because Oneness is likely to be construed as the opposite of duality and hence understood in relative terms. Buddha is the name applied to a person who has achieved this Nonduality; Buddha is not the creator as opposed to the created but rather is the whole, the integrity that is beyond any such distinction. Since the creator presupposes the created, the concept remains dualistic in nature, while Buddhahood is the "state' in which that which creates and that which is created are undifferentiated. The Undifferentiated, the Non-dual, is assumed to be the inherent nature of man; all Buddhist discipline, therefore, has as its goal the achievement of this Non-dual Entirety. To be in the Non-dual state forever is the meaning of the expression "entering into Nirvana", which is the same as "attaining Buddhahood".

Buddhism, then, is not theism, but neither would it be proper to describe it as atheism, for it perceives Law in the world where there is no opposition between existence and non-existence. Again, Buddhism is neither monotheism nor polytheism, since it does not allow the entertainment of such dualistic conceptions as "one"" and "many". Although some would pronounce Buddhism to be a kind of pantheism, that too would be incorrect, because Buddhism assumes no such special entity as a God. Against this assertion the argument might be advanced that Buddhism has so many deities that the mere enumeration of their names is a difficult task: Buddhism, therefore, must be polytheistic. But this argument may be refuted by the fact that the deities are merely manifestations of the immeasurable glory of the Law: they may be likened to the beams of the sun, radiating in all directions.

In Buddhist discipline, the central problem, the problem of primary importance as well as of greatest urgency, is how to eradicate man's two most representative forms of dualism—the opposition between life and death and the opposition between one's self and others; and every effort in Buhism re heolunhi problem.Tof conflict, enmity, resentment, lust—all these are the result of man's confinement to the dualistic world. For this reason the different Buddhist sects all teach the principle of "The Gate of the Law to the Non-dual". Different points of view and dissimilar methods of exposition have given rise to numerous Buddhist sects, but all agree in amplifying the theme of Non-dual Entirety. This inherent nature of man's may be compared to his homeland; Buddhism, then, is both nostalgic rememberance as well as the way home. The man who has found the way and succeeded in returning home may be glorified by the name of Buddha. Enlightenment becomes synonymous with the realization of Non-dual Entirety, with abiding in undifferentiated integrity.

Once there was a man seeking the way to Enlightenment who visited a priest named Kanzan."What did you come for?"asked the priest, for that is always the first question a Buddhist priest asks. "I am puzzled", replied the man, "by the problem of life and death, so I have come to seek your instruction". The priest's answer was: "Here is a place where there is neither life nor death. You might as well go home". This may, at first, seem to be an extremely impolite and unkind reply, but the fact is that the priest was trying to make clear once and for all that the world of Buddhism is a world beyond all such dualistic distinctions as that between life and death. His answer, kindly meant, was a warning that so long as life and death are conceived of as two opposing phases of existence, truth is not to be grasped.

Another illustrative anecdote concerns the great Chinese Zen monk Kuei-shan, who sought to explain the meaning o everything by making use of the circle as a symbol. One day, while engaged in training his disciples, he drew a circle on the ground, saying: "If you step into this circle, I will strike you. If you stand outside it, I will strike you just the same. What are you going to do?" By this seeming paradox, the monk hoped to show that so long as a man persists in the dualistic realm of "in" and "out", he cannot possibly attain Buddhahood.

What, the reader may ask, has this to do with the Buddhist idea of beauty? My answer is that it is an essential preamble, for I do not propose to introduce the subject of Buddhist aesthetics, since nothing of the sort has ever been cultivated as an independent branch of learning. Nor do I intend to discuss beauty as expressed through the medium of Buddhist art. My object is to clarify what interpretation of the world of beauty is possible from the Buddhist point of view and to explain the Buddhist basis on which the nature of beauty as it is pursued in the Orient chiefly depends.

Let us look at a beautiful piece of pottery. Its provenance does not concern us. If the article is beautiful, we may say that it has achieved Buddhahood, for it is not man alone that may become a Buddha. A beautiful artifact may be defined as one that reposes peacefully where it aspires to be. A man who achieves Buddhahood has entered the realm that lies beyond that of duality; by the same token, beauty is that which has been liberated—or freed—from duality.

"Freedom' is a word that is now being used rather too carelessly, and Buddhists prefer the word muge (literally, "liberation", "being free from impediment"), which refers to the absence of that impediment or restriction arising from relativity. It means the state of liberation from all duality, a state where there is nothing to restrict or be restricted. Beauty, then, ought to be understood as the beauty of liberation or freedom from impediment. It should be noted that true freedom is not fettered even by the idea of freedom. In this sense, liberalism cannot be said to realize the true meaning of freedom, because it is enthralled by principle. Even less does freedom mean selfish or lawless behaviour. True freedom must mean liberation from both one's self and others: it must not be in bondage to itself nor may it be restricted by others. Everything that is beautiful is, in one sense or another, a manifestation of this sort of freedom.

If beauty is the antithesis of ugliness, however, like good and bad or high and low, then it can only be conceived of relatively; but from the Buddhists' point of view, the "beauty' that simply stands opposed to ugliness is not true beauty. It is no more than a relativistic, dualistic idea. True beauty exists in the realm where there is no distinction between the beautiful and the ugly, a realm that is described as "prior to beauty and ugliness" or as a state where "beauty and ugliness are as yet unseparated". There can be no true beauty, then, outside that realm where beauty and ugliness have not yet begun to conflict with each other. In the Muryju-ky ("Sutra of Eternal Life"), the following statement is attributed to the Buddha:

If in the land of the Buddha there remains the distinction between the beautiful and the ugly, I do not desire to be a Buddha of such a land.

Opposition between the beautiful and the ugly is unknown in the land of the Buddha; it lies beyond any such distinction, for dualism is alien to Bu e u   e well as the ugly as opposed to the beautiful both disappear.

Beyond dualism, every object—by whomever or in whatever manner it is made—finds salvation. We need not, therefore, lie helplessly enmeshed in the conflict between the beautiful and the ugly. Once the Buddhahood beyond beauty and ugliness is attained, any work by any craftsman becomes a Buddha. In our temporal world, conflict between the beautiful and the ugly goes on incessantly and can never be finally resolved. Yet only when this resolution occurs, we are told, is everyone to be saved. Therefore we are constantly instructed to revert to the stage that precedes the distinction between beauty and ugliness, good and bad, and other apparent antitheses.

In Buddhism, this idea of the Undifferentiated plays a role of the utmost importance. Since it does not concern itself with a preference for the beautiful over the ugly but rather pertains to the realm that precedes the birth of opposition between the two, it does not permit a situation in which either the ugly or, by the same token, the beautiful exists. Here there is neither: here everything is an integrity that is unique, that is itself, that is without distinction. Here, in the Buddhist idea, is the realm where art must abide. In the words of Kabir, the Indian mystic poet (14821512):

The unstruck drum of Eternity is sounded within me.

The dance of God goes on without hands and feet.

The Harp of God is played without fingers, it is heard without ears: for He is the ear, and He is the hearer.

In this profound piece of religious poetry, Kabir is telling us that the sound of a "struck drum' would be dualistic and therefore could not constitute God's music. So long as the man who strikes the drum and the drum that is struck are two different beings, true music can never be born.

In John 7:58 there is the statement "Verily, verily, I say unto you, 'Before Abraham was, I am'." Most remarkable in this quotation is the juxtaposition of the preposition "before" and the verb "am". Clearly, this "before" is not used temporally; if it were, the verb should be "I have been", not "I am". The present tense is employed here to denote not the mere present but the Eternal Now, that Now that does not depend upon either the dualistic past or future but rather is the present that partakes of eternity. Thus, an object is truly beautiful because it belongs to the Eternal Now.

All art movements tend to the pursuit of novelty, but the true essence of beauty can exist only where the distinction between the old and the new has been eliminated. The Sung dynasty pottery of China reveals a beauty that is forever new, that is still alive today. It is like a fountainhead from which one may draw water a thousand times and still find fresh water springing forth. Its beauty belongs, in the words of Jesus, to the realm of "I am", not to that of "I have been", "I was", or "I shall be". A man who considers Sung ware to be "old-fashioned", who brands it a thing of the past, is himself superannuated. Passing time cannot affect an object that is truly beautiful. All that there is, is the Eternal Now.

## Two Ways

Not a single piece of Sung ware, as everyone knows, bears the signature of its maker: the potter never signed his work, however beautiful it may have been. One explanation that has been put forward is that in those days the custom of signing a work was still unknown. The true explanation, however, may be simpler still. Sung craftsmen were not self-conscious artists, they were not learned men, they were mere craftsmen making articles for daily use; most of them were probably extremely poor and had to work hard from morning till night, most also were probably badly educated and uninformed. They were not privileged people who could choose to work only when they were in a creative mood. Yet, despite all this, potters in Korea as well as in China were able to produce objects of consummate beauty, such as Sung ware and Koryo celadons: works of art that have endured through the ages.

What is more, these works of art were apparently produced with the greatest of ease, nor were they the production of merely a few potters. There were, in fact, a great many craftsmen who could produce, each and every one of them, works of equal merit. Even highly accomplished artists nowadays find that a tremendous amount of effort and practise, of meditation and ingenuity is essential in order to create a work of real value, with the result that only a few artists of more than ordinary talent succeed. But Sung and Koryo pottery was produced by no such known and individual geniuses. Can the mystery be explained in Buddhist terms?

I think it can, for Buddhism teaches that there are two ways of becoming a Buddha: one is called the "Way of Self-Power' (self-reliance; jiriki-d); the other, the "Way of Other Power" (reliance on an external power or grace; tariki-d). The latter may b compared to going to sea in a sailboat; the former, to walking on land. On land one very often has to traverse rugged paths, cross muddy pools, and overcome similar obstacles, time and again getting lost, growing tired, and undergoing many other trials. For that reason, it is also called the "Way of Hardship (nangy-d), and it is the way of artists and others who believe themselves to be possessed of greatness, who want to find it out and make use of it. To do this, they are willing to rely on their own individual ebu hoextriaalire e,c ce this arduous trip.

i iuses appearing in any given generation is extremely small. Thus, there are a great many people of ordinary ability living in the world, with a few geniuses among them. Are the masses doomed to simple obliteration? Is there no salvation for them? Buddhism states very explicitly that the mass of the people may also become Buddhas. The sects that emphasize that those not endowed with genius are equally to be granted the bliss of reaching their destination are called tariki-sh (sects of reliance on an external power), and their way is called the "Easy Way' (igyo-d), since everyone is to arrive safely and unfailingly. A ship entering harbour with swelling sails is not doing so on its own but has surrendered to the great power of the wind. In a similar way, the mass of the people, even those devoid of talents, may be carried to their goal with the help of a great external power: they complete their journey with ease. Those who take the hard way seek their own greatness; those who follow the easy way surrender themselves, reflecting on their own smallness.

The beauty of China's Sung pottery, then, is an instance of the goal attained by following the Easy Way, the way of reliance on grace. Rather than atribute the quality of work to the personal ability of the potters, we must conclude that it was the world in which they lived that not only protected them but also contributed to their success. Abundant natural resources, a long tradition, repetition of effort required for production in quantity, and the fact that the articles were being made for daily use all combined to assist the potters, who, for their part, meekly accepted those conditions with both body and soul as they spent long hours at the kilns. Should a craftsman of modest talent try to resist these forces and stand on his own two feet, he would be bound to meet with difficulty and, as a result, to lose his path or fall by the wayside before reaching his destination. Such a man has but one choice to make: he must rely submissively on a Greater Power.

It is a noteworthy fact that, when the way of grace is followed, very little difference results in the beauty of the final productions, no matter who the maker may be and no matter what it may be that he is making. What minor individual differences there may be are reduced to nothing by the external power. The opposite is true when the way of self-reliance is followed, for there the personality of the maker, his individual taste, and the nature of his talent dictate what the final result will be. Needless to say, even with Sung ware made in the way of grace, there are slight differences in the quality of individual pieces, but significantly not a single one is found to have deviated positively from the right course. Putting it in Buddhist terms, we may say that every piece of Sung ware has the look of having attained Buddhahood. What a sad comparison is made by present-day industrial design!

Another noteworthy fact is that Sung ware is not a manifestation of the individual personality of the maker: that lies submerged beneath the surface, while the article itself stands out. Sung potters were working in a world where identity is not of importance. In that world, no effort is made to express individuality through the medium of things; on the contrary, the aim is to produce things through the medium of man. The beauty created there is the beauty of artifacts, not of man. If there is beauty also on the side of man, it is assuredly the beauty of the submissiveness with which he has placed himself at the mercy of the great external power.

The fact that much Sung ware is decorated with superbly drawn pictures inevitably suggests that there must have been a large number of first-rate artists at work, for the technique of the brush strokes and the rendering of the figures are both remarkable. The further fact that we never encounter a design that may be called ugly or distasteful suggests also that many of the Sung potters themselves must have been highly gifted artists. Such conclusions would be wholly erroneous. In Tz'uchou, for example, where this type of ware was produced in great quantity, the task of drawing pictures on pottery was almost always relegated to young boys. No famous painters of the day were hired to work for the kilns. The job was performed by boys around the age of ten, children of poor families, many of whom no doubt disliked the work and had to be forced by their parents to do it. Occasionally, as they worked, their eyes would be blinded by tears. Others of the children were probably what we would now call juvenile delinquents, quarrelsome and naughty. Most of the children were illiterate; the Chinese characters that we sometimes see written in the pictures would, then, have been meaningless to the young writers. Like all children, they laughed and sang sometimes as they worked; at other times, they fought, but, no matter what kind of children they may have been, no matter what kind of pictures or characters they drew, the result was invariably one of marvellous beauty.

Obviously, this was not because each of the children was endowed with talent. I the hand  ens was ne, how could such ae uber  hv n ual ?Thr lain partly in the nature of the materials used, but chiefly it lay in the endless repetition that was demanded of the children. The easy use of the brush and the boldness  the composition resulted from the fact that each child had to draw the same picture hundreds of times a day. This repetition produced an amazing dexterity and a quickness of hand that must have been miraculous to watch. Hesitation had no place in it; neither had anxiety or ambition. Oblivious to all these, the children worked with total disengagement.

The repetitive monotony that today would be regarded with horror; the hard work that the young boys were forced to accept as their inevitable destiny: these two factors possessed the compensatory quality of imparting beauty to the work. The obligation to draw the same picture hundreds of times a day will make a painter forget what he is drawing; he will be liberated from the dualistic opposition of dexterity and clumsiness; no longer will he need to consider the distinction between beauty and ugliness: all that he will do is move his brush quickly and unhesitatingly, without even being aware of what he is drawing. The children of Tz'u-chou may have been thinking of chrysanthemums while drawing bamboo plants; more remarkable still, they actually drew animals they had never seen and they inscribed characters they could not read. Such factors had no inhibiting effect on them. They forgot themselves as they worked, or perhaps it would be more correct to say that they worked in a world so free they were able to forget themselves.

It was precisely here, in this submissive reliance on tradition, that the beauty of their accomplishment was promised. Tradition, the accumulation of the experience and wisdom of many generations, is what Buddhists call the Given Power-an aggregate power that in all cases transcends the individuals. Illiterate craftsmen may, as individuals, be small and weak, but, supported by this Given Power of tradition, they are able to produce work of astonishing merit with the utmost ease. The importance of tradition in the work of the craftsman can hardly be exaggerated.

Once we realize that a piece of Sung pottery is not the product of some individual genius but rather of the non-individualistic power of tradition, we understand that its beauty is not personal and there is no need, therefore, to question who its maker was. To the craftsman, tradition is both the saviour and the benefactor. When he follows it, the distinction between talented and untalented individuals all but disappears: any craftsman can unfailingly produce a beautiful work of art. But if he loses sight of the long tradition behind him, his work can only be that of a bumbling incompetent.

Tradition never asks who is enlisting its help. We have hitherto been considering only pottery, but the rule holds true for other branches of practical art as well. In Coptic textiles (Plate 27), which are one of the great marvels of textile making, we see the hands not of a small number of geniuses but of a great many unlettered women working indefatigably according to tradition. We may do well to ask ourselves how many individual artists in more recent times have been able to produce work more beautiful than Coptic textiles. We then realize that without the way of grace many beautiful objects would never have been created; to regard beauty as the prerogative of genius alone is too narrow a view.

One day, in the province of Mikawa in Japan, a woman named Osono, who had been deeply instructed in the doctrine of the Other Power, was standing in front of the temple, earnestly discussing with her friends the problem of faith. A priest, passing by, patted her on the shoulder and said, "What are you talking so intently about? We may die at any moment. How can you be so heedless?" Osono replied, "Is Buddha Amitabha ever heedless?" The priest was much impressed by her answer, for he understood that what she was saying was, in effect: "A trivial woman like me is easily distracted, but Buddha Amitabha is ever on the alert for my sake, so I feel no apprehension".

Just as Osono had surrendered herself utterly to the power of Buddha Amitabha, many craftsmen give themselves up, once and for all, to tradition. If they entertained the slightest doubt about that power, their work would come to a standstill, for they are but poor creatures, hardly worth a second thought. Yet the power of tradition enables them to accomplish great work. It is not they but tradition that bears the burden. Such craftsmen do not put their signatures to what they create, but Buddha Amitabha signs his name in large characters—although our mortal eyes cannot see it. Nevertheless, anyone who admires Sung pottery or Coptic textiles is admiring, without knowing it, the Buddha's signature. Anyone who is moved by the beauty of folkcraft is in reality being moved by the invisible power that lies beneath the surface.

## Non-Duality in Life and Art

W orace, but there is  course, the other way—the way  relying on Thu ual artists. Among Buddhist sects that advocate this way o attaining Enlightenment, the most typical is Zen, the doctrine of which is thoroughly individualist, commanding its disciples to discipline themselves by relying on their own powers until Enlightenment is achieved. A man who would follow this way, then, must possess—above allthings—a firm will and a clear head.

The final objective of Zen Buddhists is, of course, liberation from all duality: good and evil, true and false, beautiful and ugly, one's self and others, life and death, consciousness and unconsciousness. All such dualistic forms must be discarded. Day in, day out Zen Buddhists undergo rigourous training to that end, for so long as they are trapped in the polarized world, they are unable to achieve peace of mind, to attain Buddhahood. A true artist is not one who chooses beauty in order to eliminate ugliness, he is not one who dwells in a world that distinguishes between the beautiful and the ugly, but rather he is one who has entered the realm where strife between the two cannot exist. Only in the work of a man who has attained this state of mind is there no room for encroachment by the ugly or for the kind of relative beauty that is comprehensible only as an antithesis of the ugly.

Typical of Zen catechism is the dialogue between a disciple and his master, the abbot. "What if I gazed on Buddha by whisking away dust?" asked the disciple. The abbot replied immediately, "Buddha is also dust". What did the abbot mean? Did he mean that so long as one is concerned about gazing on Buddha or whisking off dust, the Buddha he sees is as good as the dust? Or did he mean to ask how the disciple could not see Buddha amid the dust without being distracted by the latter? Considering dust ugly, we desire to do away with it so as to bring forth the beautiful Buddha beneath, but Zen monks ask us if the Buddha is not plainly before our eyes in everything.

Once the master Chao-chou was asked by a disciple, "How may we be mentally prepared for all the twelve hours?" Chao-chou replied, "Most people are employed by the twelve hours, but I employ them'". Zen demands of a man that he must always be the master. Most people—labouring under the spell of the Two: self and others—are not their own masters; they are either enthralled by others or they become the slaves of themselves, of their desires, their emotions, their principles. A beautiful work of art, as it is understood by Zen Buddhism, is the work of a man who is not in bondage of any kind, either to beauty and ugliness or even to himself.

Chao-chou: "In which are you, in the light or in the dark?"

Monk: "I am in neither".

Chao-chou: "Are you between the two then?"

Monk: "I am not there either"

Chao-chou: "Then you simply dwell in the words 'neither in the light nor in the dark nor in between'?"

Monk: "I am master of those words and employ them".

Chao-chou: "That is the answer I wanted to hear"

The Zen admonition against remaining in duality is actually a warning not to be enslaved by it, for even if one dwells in duality one may still be free provided one is the master who employs duality. That is the freedom that Zen pursues. Beauty, from the Zen point of view, is the state of nonpreoccupation, it is that which is in every respect free—dexterity not in the yoke of dexterity, clumsiness not in bondage to clumsiness. Once this state is attained, everything is beautiful; but beauty cannot exist outside it, outside the realm of freedom from impediment.

In pursuit of the pre-differentiated world, Zen monks ask such questions as: "How about the time before Bodhidharma [the first Zen patriarch] came from India to China?" or "How about an old mirror before it is polished?" or "How about a lotus blossom before it emerges from the water?" Translated to the realm of aesthetics, such questions become: "How about the time before the beautiful and the ugly were differentiated?"Art is usually, o to speak, a struggle between the beautiful and the ugly, a struggle in which the artist seeks to subjugate the ugly and brin victory to the beautiful. But this is a process that can take place only after the separation of the two. The Zen point of view warns that this struggle is not a final solution to the problem, that the artist must dwell in a world before there is beauty or ugliness, that only there is salvation to be found.

This fundamental "undifferentiated" or "unborn" state is expressed in Buddhist terms as inherent r innate or inborn nature. The distinction between beauty and ugliness is post-natal and artificial, and therefore one is constantly advised to "return to one's original state', since this means liberation from dualism. The object of Buddhist aesthetics is the clarification of the following truths:

() That the inherent nature of man is not dualistic; that non-dual pa self.

)That the division of things into two is merely a later event and is unatural, that the distinction between the beautiful and the ugly is based on human delusion and is wholly artifcial.

(3) That we must accordingly forsake the dualistic fallacy and return to our old home of non-duality, where our salvation is promised.   
Zen looks forward, then, to the state where there is no dualistic strife, a   
state it describes by the words buji"no event")or bunan "no trouble")   
What is implied by the two terms is the absence of storm, of conflict, of   
disease, of living with one's self nature without illusion and in complete   
tranquillity. Worshippng the beautiful and hating the ugly are immature;   
Zen admonishes us to seek the world where no such antagonism exists.

Once a disciple asked the wise old priest Nan-ch'üan, "What is the Way like?""The everyday mind is the Way, replied Nan-chan, mean ing by "the everyday mind" the mind inherent to one who is buffeted by no raging waves or winds. May not the suffering of the modern artist be ascribed to his unrestrained pursuit of the extraordinary? Perhaps he would be wise to reflect more deeply on the meaning of what is ordinary.

The Korean hakeme pottery (see pages 17076) was made by sweeping the leather-hard green pot with a large, coarse brush full of white clay (Plate 4). The technique is a simple one, and Korean potters employed it in an extremely casual manner; they also worked very quickly, because the white clay adheres to the pot better when so treated. Japanese artists have consciously attempted to imitate this ware, for it is often used as Tea-bowls in Japan, but have failed, where Korean craftsmen, not consciously seeking to create any particular effect, have succeeded. Here, where the craftsmen do their work as a matter of course, is "the everyday mind" of the Zen Buddhists. (At one time this was the cheapest pottery in the world.) Here is the "everyday mind" of Zen: the craftsmen work "eventlessly", whereas hakeme attempted by conscious artists is the product of the extraordinary mind in pursuit of beauty and is therefore by its nature "eventful". The result is that Korean work is incomparably more beautiful than Japanese. In Zen terms, Korean hakeme is produced prior to the formation of the concepts of beauty and ugliness, while the Japanese imitation is produced after the separation of the two. The latter, clinging as it does to the dualistic view, can in no wise excel the former. Consciousness of beauty avails little as a final arbiter for the beautiful, while nothing that is ugly can exist in the "eventless, everyday mind", for that is the state where, from the beginning, no dust can collect.

Hung-jen, the Chinese Fifth Patriarch of Zen, in attempting to select a successor from among his disciples, demanded that each should compose a poem in which he was to epitomize his idea of Buddhism. His chief disciple, accordingly, wrote on the wall of a corridor:

This body is the Bodhi tree,

The soul is like a bright mirror;

Take care to keep it always clean,

And let not dust collect on it.

Hung-jen read the poem and thought it fairly good but was not altogether satisfied. The following day he found another poem written beside the previous one:

The Bodhi is not like the tree,

The bright mirror is not on its stand;

As there is nothing from the first,

Where can the dust collect?

Much moved by the poem, Hung-jen decided that its author deserved to become his successor. This was the youthful Hui-neng, who became the Sixth Patriarch of Zen.

Zen discipline is directed toward making us realize, through various means, that in our endeavor to whisk away the dust called ugliness, we are all too likely to forget that there is waiting for us a world where dust cannot collect. Thus, we are taught that the road to Buddhahood is open usalvation or l u is heent.Beu acus is p dially a Buddha, we are told to remain a Buddha, not to seek to become one. If we fail, the reason is that we are hindered by the man-made dualistic distinction or by the deep-rooted ignorance that underlies it.

The idea that salvation is prepared for us before our birth is also to be h. o Lonon physican, wriig in Relg Medic, l us:

I was not only before my selfe, but Adam, that is in the idea of God, and the decree of that Synod held from all Eternity. And in sense, Engandy places Pisand Evr before she conceiv'd of

Once two devout Buddhists were travelling together. "What shall I do should I fall into Hell?" asked one, with a worried look.Too late, to late!" cried the other. "Before you commit a sin, Buddha Amitabha will have saved you. How can you not be saved? Do you dare to believe that your sin will be too great for the mercy of Buddha Amitabha? Alas, too late, too late!"

The reason we can find nothing to dislike in the drawings made by children is that in them the inherent nature of man finds expression without being thwarted or frustrated. The moment children become self-conscious, their pictures degenerate. Naturally, their work is inferior to that produced by an able and mature man who, having intelligence, has gone beyond intelligence. A child's work lacks this depth. To put it another way, only a few really good pictures are produced by adult artists, because their dualistically inclined intelligence overrides their inherent nature, but if an artist follows his inherent nature (which is Buddhahood), everything he produces will be a work that has already been saved, whoever he may be and whatever may be the subject of his work. He would find it impossible to produce anything that was not beautiful. Similarly, in works created by primitive peoples many are tremendously vital, reflecting the primitive power of man. It follows, therefore, that even if a man lacks high intelligence or advanced technique, he can still produce objects that are beautiful, although they may at the same time be unskilled. The reason such objects so very often deserve our love is that in them the maker's inherent Buddhahood is revealed to the observer. It is noteworthy that both Jesus and Laotze adored the innocence of children; on a somewhat different level are Blake's Songs of Innocence, which are far too well known to need quoting here.

Buddhism, carrying this idea a step further, teaches that the road to salvation is prepared for everyone, from the highest to the lowest, from the greatest to the least. A man need not be wise to be saved, for everyone is to be saved as he is. Even for those poor creatures who do not deserve to be saved, Amitabha, the Buddha of Mercy, has prepared a salvation that is theirs before they commit a sin. The Christian God is also characterized by compassion and grace, but at the same time, as the Bible tells us, He is a stern judge who sends the righteous to heaven and the wicked to hell. Amitabha, on the other hand, is not a judge: he is, for want of a better word, an inviter, one who summons everybody without exception to come as he is into the Pure Land, having no fears because of the distinction between wise and foolish, skilful and unskilled, and the like. He prefers everyone to come naked and empty-handed, for that is the state leading directly to salvation. A priest, having produced an object, said to another, "Take this without your hands". The other promptly replied, "Give it to me without your hands". To be handless is to live in the land of the Buddha.

## Non-Dualistic and Dualistic Crafts

During the long Yi dynasty (1392-1910), the Koreans produced many interesting kinds of pottery (Plates 1, 4, 6365). Regrettably, they are relatively little known as compared with the earlier, and far more famous, Koryo dynasty celadon ware. They are more naive than celadon, simpler, rougher, and at the same time healthier. The designs drawn on them are sometimes so crude and primitive that they might have been done by children. Indeed, one may rightly call them childish—but, strangely or not, they are beautiful just as they are.

Drawn obviously without the least knowledge of technique, the designs are rich in an indescribable, an inexplicable, favour; however casual they are, they are invariably beautiful. There is no trace of intellectual consciousness in them, no artfulness, no hesitation or perplexity. As we study Yi pottery, we discover that its beauty is not that which is attained by eliminating ugliness but rather that which bursts out before the duality even occurs to man. The pottery is not the result of a knowledge of the nature of beauty but is produced before there is any question of knowing or not knowing. To apply to it, therefore, the criterions of beauty and ugliness, skill and awkwardness, and the like makes no sense. Indeed, Yi pottery renders all critical comment meaningless. The pieces assume no pretensions, they are simply there, in all their naturalness, looking as if they would like to say to ingenious modern artists, "There is nothing we want. Come and join us. Everybody will be saved". They belong to a world that is singularly pure and immaculate and free from dust; perhaps there is no place in it where dust can collect. The problem of ugliness is unknown in the world of Yi pottery.

Howdoes it happen, then, that we cannot easily produce works oequal beauty? Buddhists would say the answer lies in the fact that our minds are bound byobsession, by some attachment that deprives us of freedom; most particularly it is our enslavement to the ego that forces us into thralldom and binds us to duality. The favourite Buddhist admonition-"Give up your own self"—clearly expresses the means by which the root of duality must be torn out. But since this is not so easily done as said, our existence usually remains trammeled to obsession, from which it cannot escape.

Yi potters, however, had nothing to be attached to. They had little learning and no high-flown theories; they had no thought of seeing their work displayed at exhibitions or sold at inflated prices; nor did they look upon their products as works of art. Their commonplace and matter-offact attitude was what brought salvation to beauty. Yi pottery is immaculate because it was produced before there was any reason for impurity or shadow: it is, therefore, extremely natural. To be sure, there is a kind of beauty in the extraordinary and the unnatural, but these do not constitute a realm where a man may abide peacefully and contentedly. There is always an awareness of morbidity. Only an object that is natural and wholesome manifests the truest beauty, and this "natural beauty' is the Buddhist ideal. Objects that reveal ambition, objects in which lack of taste is knowingly simulated, objects where some quality such as strength or cleverness is exaggerated—these will not be universally admired for long, although they may create a momentary furor.

The fact that, in general, practical objects of wholesome and natural beauty are those intended for daily use suggests that it is this particular circumstance that imparts those qualities to them. Just as men who work hard are usually healthy, so objects that fulfill the daily functions of life are necessarily wholesome. Conversely, a lack of strength and sanity usually characterizes objects that are excessively embellished or too complicated in form, since they are unfit for daily use.

Utility does not permit unsoundness or frailty, for between use and beauty there is a close relation. Utility demands faithfulness in objects; it does not condone human self-indulgence. In creating an object intended for practical use, the maker does not push himself to the foreground or even, for that matter, to the surface. With such objects, self-assertion and error—if present at all—are reduced to a minimum. This may be one reason why useful goods are beautiful. Objects whose makers remain anonymous have, it seems to me, an easy access to beauty; the fact that the finest examples of functional art existing in the world are mostly those that have had no opportunity to be marked by the maker's signature is worthy of very careful consideration.

Most useful objects of the present day are too superficial to answer our daily inner need: they are the victims of the commercialism that characterizes the contemporary artistic world, for commercialism is the enemy of man, extirpating all beauty from his culture. This disaster has become so widespread that a number of awakened people are seeking to counter it by working with their own hands. This is the raison d'être for individualism in art. But since all artists are men of aesthetic sensibility, they nccessarily dwell in a world where beauty has already been separated from ugliness; thus, they are heavily burdened from the start. To reach their goal they must overcome great perils, correct gross errors, and endure extreme hardships.

Zen monks seek, through religion, to accomplish this, to realize, while abiding in duality, the state of mind that is not in bondage to duality. Artists, we may say, ate of the fruit of the forbidden tree when they divided beauty from ugliness—and for that offense were sent into the hell of duality. Should they remain where they have fallen, they will never be able to rid themselves of suffering and delusion. Meanwhile, the fact that they did fall cannot be undone. Their task, then, while remaining in the world where beauty and ugliness have been separated, is to live nonetheless a life that is not in bondage to that duality. To this end, Zen monks would tell them that they must perceive a world where "two" is "not-two" and "not-two" is "two". The starting point of Zen discipline, thus, is meditation on the question "What is Non-dualism?" Since meditation also is dualistic, however, the sole course open to the artist is to stand face-toface with Non-dualism itself—-and that means becoming a Buddha, for Buddha is no other than an incarnation of Non-dualism.

Becoming a Buddha does not mean that a man goes to the Buddha who exists apart from him but that he enters a world where there is no distinction between him and the Buddha. Buddha, thus, is in no opposition; Buddha cannot be objectified; until a man becomes one with Buddha, he cannot see Buddha; he must, in a word, enter the realm where Subject is Objct. In Japanese Buddhist writing, the word soku is frequently encountered. In fact, one may say that the whole truth of Buddhism revolves around this single word. It defies translation; roughly, it means "namely" or "viz.". It is a connective directly or im-mediately identifying "two" with not-two",not-two" with "two

Once a well-known Zen monk named Ma-tsu was sitting in contemplation when his teacher, Nan-yüeh, asked him what he was doing. "I am practising Zen contemplation", Ma-tsu replied. "Why?" asked Nan-yüch. Ma-tsu answered: "Because I wish to become a Buddha". At this point Nan-yüeh picked up a piece of broken tile from the ground and began to polish it. Then the following conversation took place:

Ma-tsu: "Master, what are you going to make?"

Nan-yüeh: "A mirror".

B can yo

Nan-yueh: "Nor can you become a Buddha by Zen contemplation".

What Nan-yüeh meant was that the intention of becoming a Buddha through Zen contemplation presupposes a separation between one's self and the Buddha, the objectification of the Buddha: it is, therefore, the wrong starting point. So long as Zen contemplation is regarded merely as an expedient, the cup of Zen never runs dry; but contemplation for the sake of something else is not true contemplation. Unless the act becomes an act of the Buddha himself, contemplation will be of no avail whatever; the problem cannot be solved so long as contemplation and the Buddha are two different things.

This concept may be validly applied to the world of beauty. We human beings are accustomed to thinking, "I am now painting a picture" or "I am now weaving cloth". According to Buddhism, however, such phrases express a dualistic relationship from which no true picture or cloth can result. Buddhism says that the root of the dualism is the word "I" and that it must vanish, until the stage where "picture draws picture"' or "cloth weaves cloth" is reached. In one of the Buddhist scriptures is the phrase "Buddha with Buddha", which may be taken to mean "from Buddha to Buddha", and that in turn means that all true actions take place between Buddha and Buddha. Instead of man turning to Buddha or Buddha to man, Buddha turns to Buddha, all distinction or opposition between Buddha and man having disappeared. Put in another way, one may say that "the thing turns to the thing itself".

We speak of "offering prayers to God"—but true prayers are not those offered my man to God, they are, so to speak, God's voice whispered to God himself. Plotinus, the most religious minded of Greek philosophers, concluded the Enneads with the words, "Flight of the Alone to the Alone", a phrase of remarkable depth. Would it not be possible, then, to say that all beautiful work is work done by the work itself? When an artist creates a work, he and the work are two different things. Only when he becomes the work itself and creates the work (in other words, when the work alone is creating the whole work) does true work become possible. Not the artist but the work should say "I am'": when this state is reached, a work of art deserving the name has been produced.

Meister Eckhart, the medieval German mystic, said, "The words 'I am' none can truly speak but God alone". It is not I who see God but God seeing himself in me. In Buddhist terms, all true work consists of the communion between Buddha and Buddha. To quote from a Sufi poem:

When my beloved appears,

With what eye do I see Him?

With His eye, not with mine,

For none sees Him except Himself.

To quote once again, this time from the Diamond Sutra:

There should be nowhere to live,

And in the nowhere thought should be born.

The nowhere in which I dwel is the abode of the Buddha, and the moment during which I do nothing is the moment when tremendous activity takes place. Buddhism describes this by means of the phrases "Abode of no dwelling" and "Mind of no thinking"

There is another Japanese Buddhist phrase that, although hard to translate, is not difficult to understand by means of example. The phrase is fusoku furi, which may be rendered in English as "unattached and undetached". An example would be the way the Budha's eyes are usually depicted in Buddhit painting as neithr quit en nor quite lose sgesting the features in contemplation. The intention is to betoken what lies beyond duality. One reason for the enormous popularity of Leonardo's portrait of the woman known as Mona Lisa is that her mouth is represented as neither quite open nor quite closed. I am not suggesting that a picture in which the eyes are plainly open or closed cannot be a great picture, but what I do say is that a more profound beauty results when they are represented as being open and yet not open, closed and yet not closed.

The great charm of Sung pottery arises from the treatment of the glaze, which has melted and yet is not melted, not melted and yet melted. This, in Buddhist phraseology, is the beauty of the Mean, although this Buddhist Mean must not be understood as that which lies midway between dualistic extremes: what it signifies is that the centre is everywhere, the circumference nowhere.

## ShIbUsA

Intimately associated with the Zen Buddhist idea of beauty is the Japanese Way of Tea, which does not, of course, consist simply of drinking tea but secks to plumb to the depths the meaning of beauty. The choice of utensils, the successive stages of preparation, the etiquette of drinking, the structure and decoration of the room, the arrangement of the gardens— these, as well as other visible forms, are the agents used in the pursuit, the aim of which is not merely appreciation but rather the experiencing of beauty in the midst of daily life, not merely seeing but also acting. The Tea ceremony pursues the dynamic rather than the static aspect of beauty; it seeks beauty in the motion of things. During its four hundred years of existence, it has played a vital role in developing the aesthetic sense of the people who have taken part in it.

Further, it has always been closely related to religion, in particular to Zen Buddhism. The actual meaning of the character "Zen"is "contemp lation", and in the end learning Zen and learning Tea came to have much the same significance. The Tea ceremony was, as it were, an aesthetic manifestation of Zen or a way of practising Zen in the world of beauty, and a Tea master might have been called a Zen monk living in the world of beauty. Not all students of Tea may have been aware of this, but that its spirit should be identical with the spirit of Zen has been the ideal of the ceremony.

I do not propose to go into the history or technique of Tea, but there are two aspects of it that I consider to be of some interest at this point. One is the fact that the ceremony aroused in the minds of its followers a keen interest in the utensils employed, an interest that eventually transcended the utensils required for the making and drinking of tea and was extended to functional art objects in general. It is worthy of note that the utensils employed in Tea, although they were objects of daily use, came to command the same respect and affection as paintings and pieces of sculpture.

At the same time, painting and sculpture served the practical purpose of contributing to the decoration of the room in which the ceremony was held. A painting would not be hung, for example, without first having undergone the elaborate process of mounting. Thus, one may say that in the Tea-house even painting was treated as an example of functional art.

Further, Tea taught people to look at and handle utilitarian objects more carefully than they had before, and it inspired in them a deeper interest and greater respect for those objects. It is in large measure responsible for the Japanese passion for earthenware, a passion that continues to exist and that is perhaps unique in the world in its intensity. Love of pottery is almost universal, there are a large number of collectors and frequent exhibitions, and many books on pottery and porcelain are published every year. The fact that the Japanese are such enthusiastic admirers of pottery makes the craft an easy one to follow, since well-deserved praise is granted to good potters, but the fact that a huge quantity of pottery is purchased yearly has the undesirable side effect of permitting potters of dubious merit to earn a reputation, or at any rate a living.

The second point in regard to Tea is that it formulated criteria for recognizing beauty at its height—and that not idealistically but through such concrete features as form, colour, and design. Many words were invented to describe the beauty that was to be the final criterion, and of them all perhaps the most suggestive is the adjective shibui (with the noun shibusa), for which there is no exact English counterpart. Nearest to it, perhaps, are such adjectives as "austere", "subdued", and "restrained", but to the Japanese the word is more complex, suggesting quietness, depth, simplicity, and purity. The beauty it describes is introversive, the beauty of the inner radiance. Another way of approaching its meaning is toconsider its antonyms: "showygaudyboastful", and vulgar

When it comes to color, shibusa tends toward a plain monochrome of some tranquil and unobtrusive hue, such as black, brown, or soft white; in form, something simple and peaceful; if it is decorated, only a few strokes of the brush. Reticence is an essential element in shibusa, but it must not be negative, it must express an infinite affirmation. An object o, in thespriBuhism,  show motion i tability, stabiliy in motion. This reticence, which is sometimes referred to as "silence like thunderi probably paralleled by theelquent silencemeva Christian theologians.

The wor hibu is in everyday us in Japan, and thecitri t  u is taken as a measure to determine the depth or shallowness of the beauty of any given object. Interestingly enough, someone whose taste runs to the showy is aware that shibusa is infinitely more desirable and he looks upon it with respect, hoping that he will be able to understand it when his mind becomes more mature.Western visitors to Japan who demonstrate a c r  euy hi will  yhe spoken of as people capable of understanding what beauty means in the East.

This same reticence—this shibusa—characterizes much of Japanese poeyand dancing as well as the school o paintingknown in Japan as a Painting of this school is usually characterized by the exclusive use of black (which may be described either as a colourless colour or an all-inclusive colour) and by extreme simplicity of style, the result of the boilng away of all complexity. Very often large areas of blank space are present; such space is not empty, but implies and suggests something immeasurably large. Deeply imbued with the philosophy of Buddhism, nanga inevitably subscribes to the criterion of shibusa, a vital part of the inheritance of the Japanese, nurtured by Buddhism and disseminated by Tea.

It is noteworthy that the most treasured Tea-bowls today, those selected by early Tea masters, are almost all examples of folkcraft. They were the cheapest ware of their day, having naturally little or no decoration, and of course they were unsigned. They were monochromatic, simple in every way, intended merely for miscellaneous daily use, not even for use as Tea-bowls. None, in fact, at the time it was made, had any connection with Tea at all; strangely enough, the early Tea masters chose not a single piece that was made in order to be appreciated. It is only in more recent time that Tea-bowls, signed by their makers, were created primarily for the purpose of connoisseurship; they fail, however, to surpass the beauty of the earlier, unsigned works.

In them, the early Tea masters perceived what may be termed the virtue of poverty. This, in all religions, has played a profound spiritual role. In Christianity its finest presentation is in the teachings of St. Francis of Assisi, who preached the virtue of "Holy Poverty" and founded his mendicant order on the basis of it. Poverty, as perceived by religion, does not of course refer only to an absence of money: as is demonstrated by the declaration "Blessed are the poor in spirit", it means also humbleness of mind and the foreswearing of worldly desires. Yet this is by no means a merely negative mode of living; in Carlyle's words, it is the wisdom of the Everlasting Nay leading to the Everlasting Yea. In this sense, poverty in the present world will mean richness in the world of God. Virtually the same is Buddhism's "philosophy of emptiness", which urges the renunciation of all dualistic opposition and characterizes this sphere of nothingness by the name of "poverty". To quote a famous poem by the Zen monk Hsiang-yen:

Last year's poverty was not yet true poverty.

This year's poverty is at last true poverty.

Last year there was nowhere to place the gimlet.

This year the gimlet itself is gone.

The spirit of poverty, as revealed in the world of beauty, is what we call shibusa; it is the humility that may be described as subdued, austere, and restrained, and the "poverty" itself as plain, simple, and serene. The old Tea masters found the truest beauty in folkcraft because these objects, being simple and unpretentious, partook automatically of the virtues of poverty. Shibusa expresses the beauty of poverty: objects that fail to express it are not fit to be good Tea-bowls. The deepest beauty is suggestive of infinite potentiality rather than being merely explanatory. When taste becomes mature, it prefers plain monochromes and tranquil objects. Some may say that this is the taste of old age, and in a sense it is, for, preferring a profounder beauty, it is not easily understood by the young.

All works of art, it may be said, are more beautiful when they suggest something beyond themselves than when they end up being merely what they are. For that reason objects that were considered "complete"' were Tw:  hae further to suggest, they give an impression of rigidity and coldness. That by far the greater number of Tea-bowls are of stoneware or earthenware and that very few are of porcelain may be explained by the fact that porcelain objects are in most cases too complete to be rich in after-flavour.

Recently, in the world of art, there has been apparent a remarkable tendency to attach importance to deformation. Now, although I am not personally drawn to works in which distortion is purposely attempted, I believe that truly beautiful objects usually contain in them some element o irregularity. From that point of view, it might be maintained that the grotesque is an essential ingredient of true art. An age that will tolerate grotesque art is usually a great age—but this grotesqueness must be rviablityiv ul n wholesomeness. True grotesque art must be healthy; conversely, sentimental art can never be great art.

If the Aphrodite of Melos were complete, with both her arms, she would probably not have been awarded the place of honour that she now adds to her beauty. The same principle holds true of many ruined sites, which are beautiful as they are—incomplete but eloquently poetic.

The strong hold this quest for beauty had over the early Tea masters is vividly illustrated by an anedote o perfect one is tempted to doubt its authenticity. Yet if it is not true, it ought to be. It concerns Takeno Joo, one of the early masters of Tea, and his disciple Sen no Rikyu, who was destined to become more famous than his master. One day the two men, walking down the street together, happened to pass an antique shop. Jo's eyes were arrested by a beautiful vase, which, he decided after a moment, would have been more beautiful still if it lacked one of its handles. He was eager to buy it but, fearing that Rikyu might also desire to have i, said nothing. As the two men continued n their way, he decided to return to the shop alone the next day. Early the following morning he received an invitation from Rikyu, who wrote that he wanted to hold a morning Tea ceremony with a magnificent piece of pottery that he had recently acquired. At this J had an inspiration and, pocketing a hammer, went off to the ceremony. Upon entering Riky's Tea-room, he saw a vase with flowers arranged in it. He at once recognized it as the same one he had seen in the shop the day before—and was very happy to find that the vase had already been deprived of one of its handles. That morning's Tea was a great success.

Unlike other collectors, most Tea masters prefer the incomplete; they look for slight scars or irregularities of form. If carried to excess, this desire will, of course, become unhealthy, but that there is a close relation between beauty and deformation cannot be denied. Beauty dislikes being captive to perfection. That which is profound never lends itself to logical explanation: it involves endless mystery. Contemporary Japanese potters sometimes produce pieces that are purposely deformed, but these are products of conscious artificiality and merely reflect one unfortunate aspect of the influence of Tea. True deformation in Tea-bowls results only from what is inevitable: it is wholly free from both regularity and deformity. Here again, one may say that true beauty is beauty untroubled by dualism: only the beauty of Non-dual Entirety can be true.

## The Sense of Beauty

Having attempted to define, from the Buddhist point of view, the essential nature of beauty and the factors that combine to render an object beautiful, I should now like to consider briefly how best to reach an understanding of that beauty—how, in other words, to appreciate it. One of the most famous among modern writers on the subject is the German philosopher Theodor Lipps, who died in 1914. Propounding a theory of empathy (Einfühlungstheorie), he explains that an awareness of beauty arises from the transference of one's self into the object seen and from the resulting consciousness of a fusion between the artist and his guest. In this way, Lipps says, it becomes possible for a man to understand the feeling that the object has to communicate.

Lipps's explanation presupposes a distinction between the subject that sees and the object that is seen and does not go beyond the intercourse between the two; his theory, then, stands solidly on a dualistic base and therefore cannot, according to Buddhism, provide the means for a full comprehension of beauty. The sense of beauty is born when the opposition between subject and object has been dissolved, when the subject called "I" and the object called "it" have both vanished into the realm of Non-dual Entirety, when there is no longer anybody to transfer or anything to be transferred. Neither the "I" that faces "it"' nor the "it" that faces the "I" can attain reality. A true awareness of beauty is to be found where beauty watches beauty, not where "I" watch "it". The "I-it" relationship cannot reveal beauty in its entirety, but only a small part of it. Zen Buddhism uses the phrase kensho, in which ken means "seeing" and sho "nature'; taken together, however, the two words do not mean "seeing nature"' but rather "seeing into one's nature". In kensho the artist and his guest are not two distinguishable concepts.

Just as Rome was once the great metropolis of Europe, so that of ancient China was the city of Chang-an, which every Chinese of the time longed to visit. "To everybody is given the way to Chang-an", said a monk to his teacher, "now how can I go there?" The master answered at once: "Where are you right now?" Where is Chang-an? how may I reach it? how long does the journey take?—in questions such as these Chang-an is not to be found. What the master meant was that the town o t anot exit exct at this ey instant, ainstnt without past orfuture, and on this very sot, a sot without right or left.

Another illustrative anecdote concerns a monk who for long had been living away from the society of men in a hut in remote mountains. One day a visitor who had found his way there asked him, "How many years have you been living here?" The monk replied simply, "There are no days on the calendar in these mountains". A man who lives where time can be measured on a clock is living in a secular world; a monk should live in a world where there is neither passage of time nor length of time. He should live a life that is not measured by the calendar. A sense of beauty, similarly, is timeless: it may be said to exist at this very instant, unbounded by past or future, and a beautiful object may be said to exist on this very spot, unbounded by right or left.

When I am asked for a Buddhist explanation of the perception of beauty, my answer is a simple one: "One must discard one's self". But of course the process is not easily accomplished; grasping the reality of beauty is no easier. In looking at objects, a man makes use of this intelligence; he evaluates on the basis of his own conceptions, he passes judgement on the basis of his own experience. In so doing, "I" become the master pronouncing on the "object", which I regard as my guest. Since o's self does not disappear in this process, "Iand remain tw different entities; no union between the two occurs.

The lingering on of the self may be likened to looking through coloured spectacles: one is gazing at objects through the colour called ego and therefore one cannot see them as they are, one can only see them enveloped in something else. Often a man, in attempting to see things, makes use of some form of measurement, its degrees marked in accordance with his own intellect; with it he tries to appraise everything quantitatively. But many things do not permit of such treatment, so as a result he sees only those parts that do. Whenever fixed rules are applied to an object, only certain parts of it may be perceived. But an object is an integrity; when, therefore, we force dualistic distinctions upon it, its reality has already fled.

The process may be likened to that of a man trying to catch the running water of a river: once it is caught, it is no longer running. An intellectual approach is not of much value in the understanding of beauty. The Theologia Germanica, written in the fourteenth century, tells us: "He would know before he believeth, cometh never to true knowledge". Applied to the perception of beauty, this means that if a man employs the function of knowing before seeing, his power to see is impaired. Moreover, the function of seeing cannot be derived out of the function of knowing: intuition is not born of knowledge. Integrity may be subjected to analysis but may not be recovered from the analysed parts, just as a sheet of paper may be cut into many pieces but the original sheet is not restored by bringing the pieces together.

Intuition is vital to an understanding of beauty because it is the faculty that permits us to look directly at objects. In order to give free play to intuition, one must not permit anything to intervene between one's self and the object. When that happens, one's self and the object remain separated to the end and intuition can have but a limited sphere to work in, revealing only a partial view of the object. Only after one's self has been reduced to nothing can intuition wield its unrestricted power, for only then is the opposition between that which sees and that which is seen dissipated. The viewer is not restrained by subjectivity nor does the viewed end in objectivity; the subject is itself the object, and the object is itself the subject. When intuition is at work, the object is never objectified; or, in Buddhist phraseology, seeing intuitively means entering the sphere of Non-duality.

Buddhism, therefore, insists that one receive without hands, or, in more eloquent expressions, play upon the lute without strings or sound the flute without holes. For many, the sharp edge of intuition is blunted by a failure to see with the naked mind. To be naked-minded means to be unrestricted by the eyes that see. When this is achieved, even the dust that spoils the vision will have vanished.

The fact that collections of art objects are frequently of highly uneven quality, perfection standing side by side with mediocrity, is due to the fact that in the collector himself there is a quality that has blunted the intuitive acumen: it has prevented his selecting only the treasures that should properly make up his collection. The moment he begins to boast of the quantity, variety, or rarity of his collection, to seek to collect only those objects that are in perfect condition, or to bow to popular opinion, he has subjected himself to bonds that deprive his faculty o intuition, its freedom to operate. He ceases to receive objects without using his hands, his attitude becomes restricted, beauty no longer reveals to him its own reality. He will then be seduced into believing the ugly to be beautiful and into refusing to accept as beautiful what is actually beautiful. Collectors are prone to such frailties whenever they fail to allow intuition to function at the height o its power.

First impressions, as is well known, are often astonishingly sound, and that is because we are so constituted as to perceive others with living eyes and to see objects with fresh perception. In first impressions, the faculty of intuition functions most freely, permitting us to look at unfamiliar objects with ever new and living perception. With familiar objects the process becomes increasingly less functional, but that of course is only because our own sense of perception has become dulled, not because the intrinsic value of the objects has lessened. A man of intuition is one capable of always deriving fresh impressions from objects. Intuition is the power of seeing at this very moment.

Once there was a man named Kichibei, whose unfortunate wife had been bed-ridden for two years. He himself swept the house every day, cooked all the meals, and washed the clothes. When a compassionate villager remarked how tiring all this must be, he replied, "I do not know what fatigue is, because caring for my wife every day is always both a first experience and a last experience. There is no doing it again, and so I never tire of it". Kichibei, then, lived always in the immediate moment, in "the right now". Indeed, living in "the right now" is the true condition of man's being, and when he looks at objects in "the right now", beauty will never conceal itself from him—for intuition means nothing more or less than "seeing right now'". A man of intuition may be defined as one who allows impressions to be forever new: from this point of view, an object of art is created by those who look at it, and a man of intuition is an able artist.

Why do we long for beauty? The Buddhists would reply that the world of beauty is our home and that we are born with a love for home. To long for beauty, therefore, is the same as to long for home. But home, as we know, is the world of Non-dual Entirety: everything that has been divided yearns to be reunited; everything has, so to speak, been divided in order to long to be one again. Regarding a beautiful object, then, is the same as looking at one's own native home; put another way, it is the same as looking at the original condition of man himself. He who buys a beautiful object is in reality buying himself, and he who looks at a beautiful object is seeing in it his primordial self. In an ardent lover of Sung pottery, the pottery recognizes its own home; conversely, the lover recovers his home in the pottery. Here the viewer and the viewed are not two entities.

## East and West

There is another matter that may lie within the realm of beauty. It is a truism to say that most men desire peace and loathe war; it is equally a truism to note that peace is not easily attained. Is it enough to say that war is a punishment for sin, a punishment that winner and loser share alike? More immediate, perhaps, is the fact that man tries to solve his differences by political means, always taking into first consideration the advantage that might accrue to his own country. Under such circumstances, is not war inevitable?

I believe, however, that it is possible for man to break through national barriers, and I believe further that it is in the realm of beauty that he may most easily accomplish this. True, even in the world of art, disputes arise out of opposing theories and principles; nevertheless, a beautiful object is undeniably beautiful and by its universal appeal has the power—at least temporarily—to make people forget their selfish nationalism. It is one of the virtues of beauty that it has this power: to make one forget one's self and so put an end to strife.

Happily, each nation has in its own art an expression of its particular perception of beauty. By looking at the art of all peoples, by loving and respecting it, the nations of the world can, I believe, achieve mutual spiritual harmony. We ought, in fact, to be grateful that there are beautiful objects capable of breaking down the barriers between east and west and between north and south. Peace is broken when there is dualism and opposition; but as we know, there is a world beyond this opposition where dualism is eliminated, and there must be a connecting road. I do not suggest that East and West should be made monochromatic; they should remain polychromatic but without falling into polychromatic feuds. This realm of harmony is man's true abode; but seeking it only in either East or West is inadequate and a most unfortunate decision for him to make.

One day, a Zen abbot saw a disciple about to leave the temple.

Abbot:"Where are you going?"

Disciple: "I am going to my home in the west".

Abo:I wnt  ivite you  the ouse  the . Wil ou com

Disciple: "I am afraid I cannot".

Abbot: "In that case, your abode is not yet fixed".

A man of the west, the abbot is saying, may do well to make the west his home, but so long as he is bound to it, he will not be able to find his true home even in the west. West as opposed to east is only a dualistic west, not the west where one's spirit may abide in peace.

A fnal Budhist anecdote I should like to cite hereconcerns Huing the sixth Zen patriarch whom we encountered earlier. While still a young man, before being accepted as a disciple, he was subjected to an examination by the Zen master, Hung-jen. The questions and answers are as follows:

Hung-jen: "What did you come for?"

Hui-neng: "I came to learn Buddhism".

Hung-jen: "Where did you come from?"

Hui-neng: "I came from the south".

Hung-jen: "Men of the south are all like apes-they cannot understand Buddhism. Go away at once".

Hui-neng: "There may be a north and a south on land, but there can be neither in Buddhahood".

He was immediately accepted. North and south, he was saying, east and west: they are two and yet not two. I believe that if we can ever accept this, we can hope for no greater beatitude. The discipline of aesthetics finds its chief reason for existence in putting forth this fundamental truth.

1952
