> 来源：The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.)\The unknown craftsman a Japanese insight into beauty (Yanagi, Muneyoshi, 1889-1961, Leach etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Kizaemon Tea-bowl

T hIs single TeA-BowL is considered to be the finest in the world. There are three main kinds of Tea-bowls, those originating in China, Korea, and Japan, respectively. The most lovely are from Korea, and men of Tea always give them first place. Of these, there are many varieties, such as Ido, Unkaku, Komogai, Goki, Totoya, etc. The one considered most aesthetically satisfying is the Ö Ido ("Great" Ido). Again, there are varieties of  Ido: Ko Ido, Ao Ido, Ido Waki. The finest are called meibutsu Ido, meibutsu signifying the particularly fine pieces. There are twentysix bowls registered as meibutsu, but the finest of them all, and the one of which I shall write here, is that known as Kizaemon Ido (Plate 1). This bowl is said to contain the essence of Tea.

It is not known whence the word Ido derives; it was the name of the place where these pots came from in all probability. Kizaemon is a man's name—Takeda Kizaemon, a merchant of Osaka, who owned the bowl. A meibutsu has to have a pedigree [like an English racehorse]. Honda Tadayoshi, lord of Noto, possessed this bowl at the beginning of the seventeenth century. In 1634 it passed into the hands of Nakamura Sosetsu, a Tea master of Sakai. In 1751 it went to Toshi Ieshige, then in 1775, approximately, it became the property of Lord Matsudaira Fumai of Matsue, who was a great collector of Tea-bowls, at a price of 550 ry (an immense sum). Fumai was exceedingly fond of it and kept it by him constantly. In 1818 he gave it to his son Gettan with the injunction, This isneof the finest pieces in the land; you must reasure it alw

But this Tea-bowl got the reputation of bringing sickness and death to its owner. There was once a dilettante who owned this particular bowl.

He came down in the world and finally ended up as a groom for visitors to the Shimabara gay quarters in Kyoto, but he clung to the bowl without selling it. And the unhappy man was stricken with boils and died. From this time legend had it that a curse was associated with the bowl. It had this repute before Lord Matsudaira bought it, and he himself twice fell ill with a plague of boils. His wife begged him to get rid of it, but he refused, and his son Gettan inherited it in due course. Thereupon Gettan got a plague of boils, and the family gave it into the keeping of their priests in the Koh-an, a subsidiary establishment of the Daitoku-ji temple in Kyoto, the site of the family graves. One can still see, hung up at the entrance to the temple, the palanquin that is said to have been used to bring the bowl in 1804. Before the Meiji era nobody could see it without the permission of the Matsudaira family. It is one hundred years since Matsudaira died; men die, but the bowl is as it always was.

In 1931 I was shown this bowl in company with my friend, the potter Kanjir Kawai. For a long time I had wished to see this Kizaemon bowl. I had expected to see that "essence of Tea", the seeing eye of Tea masters, and to test my own perception; for it is the embodiment in miniature of beauty, of the love of beauty, of the philosophy of beauty, and of the relationship of beauty and life. It was within box after box, five deep, buried in wool and wrapped in purple silk.

When I saw it, my heart fell. A good Tea-bowl, yes, but how ordinary! So simple, no more ordinary thing could be imagined. There is not a trace of ornament, not a trace of calculation. It is just a Korean food bowl, a bowl, moreover, that a poor man would use every day—commonest crockery.

A typical thing for his use; costing next to nothing; made by a poor man; an article without the flavour of personality; used carelessly by its owner; bought without pride; something anyone could have bought anywhere and everywhere. That is the nature of this bowl. The clay had been dug from the hill at the back of the house; the glaze was made with the ash from the hearth; the potter's wheel had been irregular. The shape revealed no particular thought: it was one of many. The work had been fast; the turning was rough, done with dirty hands; the throwing slipshod; the glaze had run over the foot. The throwing room had been dark. The thrower could not read. The kiln was a wretched affair; the firing careless. Sand had stuck to the pot, but nobody minded; no one invested the thing with any dreams. It is enough to make one give up working as a potter.

In Korea such work was left to the lowest. What they made was broken in kitchens, almost an expendable item. The people who did this were clumsy yokels, the rice they ate was not white, their dishes were not washed. If you travel you can find these conditions anywhere in the Korean countryside. This, and no more, was the truth about this, the most celebrated Tea-bowl in the land.

But that was as it should be. The plain and unagitated, the uncalculated, the harmless, the straightforward, the natural, the innocent, the humble, the modest: where does beauty lie if not in these qualities? The meek, the austere, the unornate—-they are the natural characteristics that gain man's affection and respect.

More than anything else, this pot is healthy. Made for a purpose, made to do work. Sold to be used in everyday life. If it were fragile, it would not serve its purpose. By its very nature, it must be robust. Its healthiness lcace l health in something made.

One should correctly say, perhaps, that there is no chance for it to fall sick; for it is a perfectly ordinary rice bowl used every day by the poor. It is not made with thought to display effects of detail, so there is not time for the disease of technical elaboration to creep in. It is not inspired by theories of beauty, so there is no occasion for it to be poisoned by overawareness. There is nothing in it to justify inscribing it with the maker's name. No optimistic ideals gave it birth, so it cannot become the plaything of sentimentality. It is not the product of nervous excitement, so it does not harbour the seeds of perversion. It was created with a very simple purpose, so it shuns the world of brilliance and colour. Why should such a perfectly ordinary bowl be so beautiful? The beauty is an inevitable outcome of that very ordinariness.

T aware  at  theyreard  as aneativ virtu.Theyniv ive beauty as our duty. Yet the truth is odd. No Tea-bowl exceeds in Ido bowl in beauty.

All beautiful Tea-bowls are those obedient to nature. Natural things are healthy things. There are many kinds of art, but none better than this. Nature produces still more startling results than artifice. The most detailed human knowledge is puerile before the wisdom of nature. Why should beauty emerge from the world of the ordinary? The answer is, ultimately, because that world is natural. In Zen there is a saying that at the far end of the road lies effortless peace. What more can be desired? So, too, peaceful beauty. The beauty of the Kizaemon Ido bowl is that of srifeless peace, and it is fitting that it should rest in that chapel, the Kho-an, for in that quiet place it offers its silent answer to the seeker.

From my heart I am thankful for those discriminating eyes of the men of Tea who chose their Tea-bowls. It was by an extraordinary honesty and depth of perception that they formed their standards. In the whole world I know of no parallel. In their appreciation lay an astonishing creativity. Emerging from a squalid kitchen, the Ido bowl took its seaton the highest throne of beauty. The Koreans laughed. That was to be expected, but both laughter and praise are right, for had they not laughed they would not have been the people who could have made such bowls, and if they had not continued to laugh they could not have gone on making them; and on the other hand if they had not been made as commonplace crocks the Tea masters would not have selected them. The Koreans made rice bowls; the Japanese masters made them into Tea-bowls.

The Tea masters liked the fine netting of crackle on Ido bowls for the warm, fresh friendliness it gives. They found a charm when the glaze skipped in firing, and when a "landscape" formed in the pattern of mended cracks. They enjoyed free, rough turning and felt that many pots are incomplete without it. They gave great attention to the cutting of a footring, and delighted in natural runs and drips of congealed glaze. Then again they developed a high appreciation for the internal volume and curves of bowls; they looked to see how green tea settles into them. They were particular how the rims of bowls feel to the lips and how the endless ring is varied. They embraced the shape and kissed the thickness. And they knew what heart's ease there was in a gentle deformity. Finally, they worked out the conditions that made a bowl beautiful; for all beauty is inseparable from laws.

If Ido bowls had not been recognized in Japan, their beauty might not have been perceived in Korea or elsewhere. Japan became the native land of the Ido Tea-bowl. In the Gospel of Matthew, it says Jesus was born rather in Bethlehem than in Nazareth. In this statement there is truth.

So far I have looked at the character of the Ido Tea-bowls from the point of view of the users, the Tea masters. Now I would like to consider them from the potter's angle. By whose hands was that remarkable beauty produced, to be later discovered by the sharp eyes of men of Tea? Whence came that power?

It is impossible to believe that those Korean workmen possessed intellectual consciousness. It was precisely because they were not intellectuals that they were able to produce this natural beauty. The bowls were not products of conscious effort by the individual. The beauty in them springs from grace. Ido bowls were born, not made. Their beauty is a gift, an act of grace. The seven rules evolved by the masters of Tea were born by nature rather than made by man. They did not own the laws of beauty. Laws exist in a realm that transcends the self and ownership. Laws are the work of nature, not the product of human ingenuity.

It is nature that makes laws work. To observe them is appreciation. Neither is a matter of the maker's intellectual ingenuity. The artistic qualities inherent in a Tea-bowl belong to nature in their origins and to intuition in their perception. There is no objection to seeing seven "things to see" (i.e., points that constitute the aesthetic appeal) in the Ido bowls. But this should not lead one to believe that they were made for the sake of these seven points. Nor should one assume that so long as these seven points are all present the result will be a beautiful bowl; for the points are a gift of nature, and not the product of conscious artifice. Yet how often in Japanese Tea-bowls have people laboured under the obvious delusion that you could create beauty by artificially lining up these seven qualities.

The Tea masters assert that Korean bowls are the best. It is an honest admittance. Why, one asks, do they surpass Japanese bowls? And the answer is that Japanese potters strove to make good pots according to accepted canons, or rules. To confuse the two approaches to pots, that of the maker and that of the user, is quite wrong. Production was poisoned by appreciation. Japanese bowls bear the scars of awareness. Raku Chjiro, Honami Ketsu, and other individual potters all to a greater or lesser degree suffer from the same sickness. It is all very well to find irregularities of form in Ido bowls charming, but to make pots with deliberate distortions is omediately le hat harm. I glazeski during the fring o a pot, it is natural, it may be a blessing in disguise, buelatel some Tea master's rules is quite another matter.

The foot-ring of an Ido bowl is exceptionally beautiful, but to set out to copy its spontaneous irregularities is fatal; the beauty vanishes. All these wilful sorts of deformation are to be found in Japanese pots above all others. It is our specialized kind of ugliness, all in the pursu't o misconceived beauty. There are few parallels anywhere in the world. It is ironical that the Japanese Tea masters, whose appreciation of beauty was more profound than anybody else's, should have perpetuated, and still be perpetuating, this evil. There is hardly one bowl stamped with the Raku seal that escapes ugliness. By contrast, every single Ido Tea-bowl escapes. The Kizaemon Ö Ido bowl is the antithesis of and challenge to Raku.

As I have said, the eyes that first recognized this content in the Ido bowls were astounding in their perceptivity. Whence came this insight? Was their sense of appreciation different from others? The answer is simple: they saw things directly, and things appeared directly to them. To "see directly' here refers to unclouded intuitive perception. These men did .not rely on certificates of authenticity. They did not rely on inscribed names. They did not ask whose work it was. They did not follow the judgements of others. They did not love a piece because it was old. They just looked at it directly. There was nothing between the thing and their eyes; their eyes were unclouded. That was why they could make a judgement unswayed by irrelevancies. The thing went into them, and they went into the thing. There was a healthy give-and-take between the two sides. There was an exchange of love.

Indeed, the only reason why Tea can constitute a religion of beauty is that the intuitive perception of beauty forms its basis. Intuition is its bedrock, just as intuition is the bedrock of religion. If a thing cannot be seen directly there can be no Way of Tea, nor any Tea-bowl. What can we learn from this?

With direct vision the real things of Tea can be found even today. Many great meibutsu can appear before our eyes tomorrow because there are still many products of craft in the world today that come out of like circumstance and have the same heartbeat, the same workmanship as those Ido bowls. So many worship those bowls because of the name, Ido, and are thereby blinded to unseen  Ido around them. In actuality we today have more opportunities of seeing, of finding crafts of this order than the old Tea masters had. Were they to be amongst us once more, their tears would fall with delight, and they would be collecting newly seen things of Tea and adapting them for a new Way of Tea for all people. Direct vision makes hearts and eyes busy.

[Upon my first reading of this paragraph I was surprised almost to protest, but then I reflected on Yanagi's own work in the sheer opening of his own and all our eyes to the beauty and normality surrounding Japan, Korea, and China, while the attention of all was centred upon new, industrial products, most of which were poorly designed and even vulgar, even if utilitarian. Since 1931, handcrafts have deteriorated all over the world, but this fact does not undermine the truth of his contention.—B.L.]

As I held the Kizaemon Ido bowl in my hands, many thoughts passed through my mind. I thought of all the things I had collected over the years for the folkcraft museum, and then of this one bowl. It seemed to be telling me to go on with the work I had undertaken. I was reconvinced that the road behind me and the road ahead were right roads. I shall go on pointing to the brethren of the Ido as I travel so that things of beauty and truth, even if but a few, shall adorn the world of tomorrow. I shall tell of true beauty, and I shall strive to find the way for such things to be made again. The Kizaemon Ido was returned, repacked in its many boxes. I recognized a number of kans that demanded my solution. As I left the temple gate the wind blowing through the Zen forest appeared to be charging me to, "Speak, speak!"

1931
