> 来源：The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 16 Gradual money and cataclysmic money

Thus far, I have beea writing almost entirely about the qualities chat work for inberent succex in cities. To make an analogy, it is as if I had been discusing farming almost entirely in terms of soil, water, machinery, seed and fertilizer requirements for good crops, but said notling about the financial means of getting those things.

To understand why the financial means and methods used for buying the agriculural necessicies mattered greatly, we would first have to understand why the crop-growing requirements themselves mattered greatly, and someching about their own nature. Without that understanding, we might ignore the problem ourselves up instead with methods to finance ever more elaborate fencing. Or, knowing that water was somehow important, but underxanding little about its posible sources for our purpose we might spend our substance on rain dances and have no financial arrangements to buy pipes.

Money has its limitations. It cannot buy inherent success for cicies where the conditions for inherent success are lacking and where the use of the money fails to supply them. Furthermore, money can only do ultimate harm where it destroys the conditions rieeded for inherent success. On the other hand. by helping to supply the requirements needed, money can help build inherent succc.ss in cities. Indeed. it is indispensable.

For these reasons, money is a powerful force both for city decline and for city regeneration. But it must be understood that it is not the mere availability of money, but how it is available, and for what, that is all important.

Three principal kinds of money finance and shape most of the changes that occur in residential and business properties in cities. Because this money is so powerful an instrument—as it goes, so go our cities.

The first, and most important, of the three kinds of money is the credit extended by conventional, nongovernmental lending institutions. In order of size of their mortgage holdings, the most imporrant of these institutions are: savings and loan associations, life insurance companies, commercial banks and mutual savings banks. Added to these are various categories of minor mortgage lenders —some of them growing rapidly, such as pension funds. By far the lion's share of building, remodeling, rehabilitation, replacement and expansion that occurs in cities (as well as in the suburbs beyond cities) is n by this kinofony.

The second kind of money is that provided by government, either out of tax receipts or through governmental borrowing power. Aside from the city building which is traditionally gov-o erties are also financed in some cases by this money. Scill more are shaped and influenced by the fact that it can be drawn on for partial financing, or for insurance of other loans. Land-clearance subsidies from the federal and city governments to make privately financed redevelopment and renewal projects financially feasible, are among the uses of this money; so are housing projects underwritten by federal, state or city governments. In addicion, the federal government will guarantee as much as go percent of the value of residential mortgages financed by conventional lenders —and will even buy up guaranteed mortgages from lenders— -provided that the developments whose mortgages have thus been guaranteed conforn to standards of planning approved by the Federal Housing Administration.

The third kind of money comes from a shadow world of investment, an underworld of cash and credit, so to speak. Where this money comes from ultimately, and by what avenues it finds its way, is concealed and devious. This money is lent at interest rates starting at about 20 percent and ranging as high as the market will bear, apparently in some cases up to 8o percent in combinations of interest rates and arrangers' fees and cuts. It does many jobs—a few of which are actually constructive and useful —but it is most notable for financing exploitative conversions of humdrum buildings to slum buildings at exorbitant profits. This money is to the mortgage market what loan-shark money is to personal finance.

All three of these kinds of money behave differently in important respets. Each des its part infnancn city propery changes.

With full awareness of their differences—and especially the moral difference between the shadow-world money and the legitimate private and govermental money—I plan to point out that the behavior of these threc kinds of money is similar in one respect. In sum, this money shapes cataclysmic changes in cities. Relatively little f it shapes rdual change.

Cataclysmic money pours into an area in concentrated form, producing drastic changes. As an obverse of this behavior, cataclysmic money sends relacively few trickles into localities not treated to cataclysm.

Putting it figuratively, insofar as their effects on most city streets and districts are concemed, these three kinds of money beav ot k riaton ytems, bringing iegivinsrest feed steady, continual growth. Instead, they behave like manifesmtions of malevolent climates beyond the control of man—afording either searing droughts or torrential, eroding floods.

This is f cure cnstucive way tourt c.iy building that has a solid footing produces continual and gradual change, building complex diversifications. Growth of diversity itself is created by means of changes dependent upon each other to build increasingly effecrive combinations of uses. Unslumming--much as it should be speeded up from the glacial pace at which it now proceeds—is a process of steady but gradual change. All city building that retains staying power after its novelty has gone, and that preserves the freedom of the streets and upholds citizens' self-management, requires that its locality be able to adapt, keep up to date, keep interesting, keep convenient, and this in rurm requires a myriad of gradual, constant, close-grained changes.

tion (which means, mainly, supplying the conditions to generate diversity), and to keep them there, is a job that cannot be begun too soon. But on the other hand, it is also a job that is never over and done with, and never will be, in any given place.

The kind of money necessary for capicalizing upon, building upon and supplementing what exists is gradual money. But this indispensable instrument is lacking.

This is ar from n inevitable situation. On the contrary, iths taken considerable well-intended ingenuity (along with a certain amount of drifting) to bring us to this pass. The inevitable," as Holmes said, comes about only through great effort; this is so with respect to the cataclysmic use of money in cities. As one us indication o th ll he pe talks nd brochur ing investinent in sweeping renewal cataclysms were bound together, they would make a volume at least fifty times the size of this book. And yet, notwithstanding all this promotion, and the immense data-collecting and legislative work behind it, so cumbersome is this form of city investment that it serves better, in many instances, to paralyze and to penalize the use of money rather than to stimulate and to reward it. Ever greater incentives must constantly be contrived to give investment in this type of cataclysm another shot and another shove. As Arthur H. Motley, president of the U. S. Chamber of Commerce, commented at a renewal conference late in 196o, "Some cities using federal funds have acquired so much land without rebuilding that the Federal

Housing and Home Finance Agency has become the largest grower of ragweed."

Motley's bleak realism was not in the spirit of such conferences, which run mainly to platitudes about the "challenge," and "the businessman's stake in healthy and beautiful cities," and to such sage remarks as "Tbe key to future invesnnenr in this field is the profit factor."

Be emrga  uilimo concern about the profit factor—in most cases legitimate concern about legitimate profits. But in addition, behind the use of this money stand more abstract ideas about cities themselves, and these ideas are mighty determinants of what is done with money in cities. No more than park designers or zoners do mortgage lenders operate in an ideological or legislative vacuum.

Let us begin with the existence and the effects of money droughts, for droughts of mortgage money are the cause of much otherwise unnecessary city decline.

I the power to ax is the power to destroy  then the credit authority is not only the power to destroy but the power to create and the power to divert," says Professor Charles M. Haar of the Harvard Law School in an analysis of federal incentives for home-building investment.

The power to destroy which is possessed by authority over credit or by management of credit is negative: it is the power to withhold credit.

To understand the effects of this action on city neighborhoods we can be.st begin by looking into a couple of miracles—for the purpose of understanding that it does take miracles to overcome this force for decline.

The North End of Boston represents escape by miracle.

Following the Great Depression and then the war, periods in which virtially no building was done in any case, the North End was blacklisted by conventional lending institutions as a locality for mortgage loans. This meant that the North End was cut off from building, expansion or rehabilitation credit from the American lending systems almost as effectively as if it were a community in Tasmania.

For thirty years, beginning with the Depression and moving on into the period of Blacklist, the largest conventional mortgage loans made in this district were for \$3,ooo, and these have been rare: The most affuent suburb, one would surinisc, could hardly have held up over such a period under such terms. Material improvemenr would be miraculous.

Owing to 3 peculiarly fortunate circumstance, the North End did manage such a miracle. Among its residents and businessmen ad eve  ,  aae sons engaged in the building trades: masons. electricians, carpenters, contractors. These people have contributed their services in some cases and bartered them in others to modernize and rehabilicate North End build'irgs. Costs have been mainly costs of materials, and it has been possible to fnance chese pay-asyou-go, out of savings. In the North End, a businessman or landlord has to have the money first, to finance improvements which he anticipates will justify the expendiure by returing it.

In short, the North End reverted to primitive methods of barter and hoard that worked before there were banking systems. To do so was a given condition for continued unslumming and for community survival.

These methods, however, cannot be stretched to cover the financing of the new construction which should be introduced into the North End, as into any living city neighborhood, gradually.

The Nor En a his sancan r wy by submitting to a cataclysm of renewal and redevelopment— a cataclysm which would destroy its complexity, disperse its people and wipe out its businessmen.\* It would also cost an immense amount of money in comparison with the North End's needs for money to finance steady, continual improvement and replacement of what wears out.

The Back-of-the-Yards in Chicago survived and improved after is death warrant had seemingly been sealed; it did so wich a different kind of extraordinary resource. So far as I know, the Back-of-the-Yards is the only city district which has met the common problem of credit blacklisting head on and overcome it by direct means. To understand how it was able to do so, it is necessary to understand a little of the history of this district.

The Back-of-the-Yards used to be a notorious slum. When the great muckraker and crusader, Upron Sinclair, wanted to describe the dregs of city life and human exploitation in his book, The Jungle, it was the Back-of-the- Yards and its associated stockyards he chose to portray. People from there who sought jobs outside the district gave false addresses, as late as the r93o's, to avoid che discrim'ination that then attached to residence there. Physically, as recently as 1953, the district, a hodgepodge of weather-beaten buildings, was a classie example of the sort of locality which it is conventionally believed must be bulldozed away entire.

In the 193o's the breadwinners of the district worked principally in che stockyards, and during that decade the district and its people becane deeply involved in unionizing the packing planrs. Building upon the new militancy, and resolving to seize the opportunity it offered for submerging old nationality antagonisms that had previously set the district asunder, a number of very able men started an experimenr in local organization.\* Called the Back-of-the-Yards Council, the organization adopted the brave slogan, "We, the people, will work out our own destiny." The Council has come to operate much as a government does. It possesses a more inclusive and formal oiganization than the usual citizens' association, and much greater power, both for carying out public services of its own and for exerting its will on the muni'cipal government. Policies are set by a kind of legislature of two hundred elected representatives from smaller organizations and street neighboroods. The distict's powr  et from city hall the municipal services, facilities, regulations, and exceptions to regulations it needs is regarded with considerable awe throughout Chicago. In short, the Back-of-the-Yards is no portion of the body politic to mke on lightly or unthinkingly in a fight, which is a point of major significance to this story.

In the interval between the formation of the Council and the cearly 195o's, the people of the cistrict and their children made other kinds of advancement. Many graduated into skilled industrial, white-collar or professional jobs. The "inevitable" next move at chis stage should have been a mass emigration to incomesorting suburbs, with a new wave of people possessing lirtle choice sweeping into the abandoned district. Backward, the perpetual slum.

Like people generally in unslumming city neighborhoods, however, the people of this district wanted to stay. (That is why they had already been uncrowding and unslumming within their neighborhoods.The existing institutions, epecially the churches, wanted them to stay.

At the same time, however, thousands of residents also wanted to improve their dwellings beyond the uncrowding and the small amount of refurbishing or refurnishing already accomplished. They were no longer slum dwellers and they did not wish to live as if they were.

The two desires—-to stay and to improve—-were incompatible because nobody could get a loan for an improvement. Like the N n ckhr  a e credit.

But in this case an organization capable of dealing with the problem existed. A survey by the Council turned up the infornation that businesses, residents and institutions within the district had deposis in some thirty of Chicago's savings and loan associations and savings banks. Within the district, it was agreed that these depositors—institutions and businesses as well as individuals —would be prepared to withdraw their deposits if lending institutions continued to blacklist the district.

On July  3, representatives of the banks and the savings and loan associations turned up by the Council's survey were invited to a meeting. The mortgage problem of the district was presented and discussed amiably. Comments were dropped by Council spokesmen, politely, about the numbers of depositors in the district . . . the extent of their deposits . . . the difficulty of understanding why investment of savings by city dwellers seemed so little available for use in cities . . . the solid concern about the problem within the district . . . the value of public understanding.

Before the meeting was over, several of the lenders pledged their help—that is, favorable consideration of requests for loans. The same day, the Council began negotiating for a site for forrynine new dwellings. Soon afterward, the most squalid row of slum apartments was equipped with indoor plumbing and otherwise modernized, by means of a 9o,0oo loan. Within three years, some five thousand houses had been rehabilirated by their owners, and the number rehabilitated since has been so great it has not been kept track of. In 1959, construction of several small apartment houses was begun. The Council, and people within the district, refer to the banks' interest and cooperation in their improvement with gratitude. And the banks, in their turn, speak admiringly of the area as a location for sound investment. Nobody was thrown out of the district and "relocated." No businesses were destroyed. Unslumming, in short, has proceeded, even though the process reached a point—as it eventually does everywhere—when the need for credit becomes crucial.

Credit blacklisting of city localities is impersonal. It operates not against the residents or businessmen, as persons, but against their neighborhoods. For example, a merchanr with whom I am acquainted in the blacklisted district of East Harlem in New York, unable to get a \$ 5,0oo loan for expanding and moderizing his successful business there, had no dificulty raising \$30,000 tobuild a house on Long Island. Similarly, a person in the North End, purely by being alive and by holding a job as a bricklayer or a bookkeeper or a boltmaker, can easily borrow thirty years' worth of money, at the going rate, for the purpose of buying a house in a suburban development. But artached to the North End, neither he, nor his neighbors, nor their landlords, are worth a penny's credit.

This is outrageous and destructive, but before becoming outraged, it is well to pause and consider that the banks and other conventional lenders who blacklist city localities have done no more than take seriously the conventional lessons of city planning. They are not villainous. Credit-blacklist maps are identical, both in concepcion and in most results, with municipal slumclearance maps. And municipal slum-clearance maps are regarded as responsible devices, used for responsible purposes—among their purposes is, in fact, that of warning lenders not to invest here.

Somerimes the planners anticipate the lenders; sometimes the lenders anticipare the planners; both of them know what they are doing because they have both learned so much about Radiant Garden City Beautiful planning. The two devices--blacklist maps and slum-clearance maps came into common use at about the same time, in the early 194o's. With the fenders, they first started as maps of areas in which there hatl been large numbers of foreclosures during the Great Depression, and which hence were presumably poor risks for future loans. This criterion, however, receded into the background. (It was confusing. The Grand Central office area in New York had one of the worst foreclosure records in the country; did this mean it was a poor risk for future invesanent?) The modern criterion is the lenders' decision that such-and-such a place is already a slum, or else is desined to become a slum. Its furure, insofar as it is considered, is thus conceived in terms of orthodox city planning remedies: eventual erasure, and in the meantime, decline.

In choosing to use the power of credit to destroy, lenders operate on the premise, therefore, that their actions register an inevitability and, in the light of that inevitability, no more than prudence. They are making prophecies.

Usually their prophecies are borne out, too. Consider, for example, the case of a New England city (not Boston this time) with an extensive and well-publicized redevelopment program. As a foundation for its work, the redevelopment staff prepared a map that showed where decay had proceeded so far thar clearance was deemed necessary. After the map was made, the planners discovered that it coincided, exactly, with the maps prepared by the city's bankers many years previously, designating localiti'es into which no loans would be made. The bankers had prophesied these places would become hopeless slums, and their prognoses were accurate. Only one minor discrepancy showed berween the two maps. This was a case in which the planners' map prescribed not complete clearance, but instead spot clearance. In this one insunce, a blacklisted locality, including parts of its small business district, had not seemed too far gone for limited conservation. This localiry alone had its independent source of credit: a small, family-run bank, a vestige of earlier days, an oddity that did make loans within its blacklisted area.: Such business expansion and refurbishing, such upkeep as the locality had, was financed by it. This, for instance, was the source of credit that had enabled the neighborhood's outstanding commercial establishment--a restaurant drawing customers from all over the city—to acquire good equipment and to expand and refurbish as needed.

Credit-blacklisting maps, lk slum-clerncemaps  ce prophecies because they are self-fulflling prophecies.

In the cases of the North End and the Back-of-the-Yards, the blacklist maps were inaccurate prophecies. But no one would ever know they had been inaccurate estimates of the porentiality, were it not for the miraculous ability of these places to evade their sentences.

Other ciry neighborhoods of vitality often show resistance to the death sentence. My own neighborhood did for twelve years (this was a case in which the planners led the way with a slumclearance map and the lenders followed). A few streers of East Harlem have stood up under blacklissing since 1942. by means of loans made back and forth among families and relatives.\*

There is no tel'ing how many ciy disricts have been destroyed by blacklisting. The Lower East Side of New York, an area of great potential—at least as great a potential as Greenwich Village—was doomed by blacklisting. The Society Hill district in Philadelphia, on which great sums of public renewal money are now to be spent to "bring back the middle class" offcially, was chosen by many middle-income people on their own initiative in years past-—only to be unchosen when they could not get loans to buy or to rehabilitate there.

Unless a neighborood does possess extraordinary viality, along with some form of extraordinary resource, a drought of conventional money inexorably enforces deterioration.

The worst cases are neighborhoods that are already stagnant, with much that is inherently wrong. These localities, which are losing their former residents anyway, often undergo a special form of investment cataclysm. Within a short interval after they are blacklisted for conventional credit, there may come into the vacuum money from the shadow world of investment. It pours in, buying up property for which there are no other purchasers now, and presumably will not be, and to which their current owners or users have no great, effective atrachment. Quick conversions of buildings to the most exploitative slums follow. Shadow-world cataclysmic money is flling in the gap left by conventional money.

This sequence occurs in most great cities, and seems to be taken for granted, although few studies have been made of it. One of these few was a research repont on a cataclysmically deteriorated area of New York's West Side, by Dr. Chester Å. Rapkin, an economist and planner. Rapkin's report described the imposition of a money drought from conventional sources, the appearance of high-interest and unscrupulous money in its stead, the inability of property owners to make changes except for the sale of their property to exploitative purchasers. The New York Times, quoting James Felt, Chairman of the City Planning Commission, for which the report was preparod, summed it up both neatly and dispassionately:

aged to ger bank loans for the property owners concemed, with which they could repay the toans he had made them for inaterials.

He said that it disclosed the almost complete terinination of new construction in the cwenty-block area. He said it also showed a halt in the flow of bank and other instirutional mortgage loans on real property, a turnover of property to a new type of investor, a growth ofabsentee ownership and the transforination of much of the housing occupancy in the area into furnished-room occupancy. -

All three kinds of cataclysmic money have been involved in this debacle, as they often are in city decay. Fist the withdrawal of all conventional money; then ruination financed by shadowworld money; then selection of the area by the Planning Commission as a candidate for cataclysmic use of government money to fnance renewal clearance. This last stage makes possible cataclysmic re-enty of conventional money for financing renewal-project construction and rehabilitation. So well do these three different kinds of money prepare the way for each other's camclysms that one would be impelled to admire the process, as a highly developed forn of order in its own right, were it not so destructive to every other form of city order. It does not represent a "conspiracy." It is a logical outcome of logical men guided by nonsensical but conventional city planri ng beliefs.

The remarkable fact, however-—and a great testimony to the strength and magnetism of many city neighborhoods in adversity —is the degree to which they resist their financial death decrees. This was discovered in New York City during the 195o's, after new laws required central heating in tenement buildnigs. Landlords were to be recompensed for the improvements by rent increases or tax abatements. The arrangement ran into unexpected obstacles, and precisely in places where no particular obstacles avbpaally ro well, where the tenants could have absorbed the increases. Money n ns)  y unobtainable.

The difficulties of one landlord, haled into court for violation of the law, were reported in the newspapers in December 1959, because he happened to be a Congressman, Representative Alfred E. Santangelo, and was therefore newsworthy. Sancangelo reported that the central heating had been inswlled since inspection, and went on to recount that it had cosr \$15,ooo for each of six buildings his family owned, or a total of \$90,ooo. "Of this," he said, "we could get only \$23,ooo from banks-by extending a mortgage for five years, and by getting a personal bank loan. We had to do the rest with personal family monies."

Sanrangelo did very well with the banks, considering the usual treatment of requests for loans into blacklisted localities. From time to time, the New York newspapers print letters about the problem. One such, from a lawyer of a landlords' association early in 1959, said:

It is common knowledge that banks and insurance companies have refrained from making loans or mortgages to owners of tenement houses, especially those located in what have been marked as undesirable areas in the city. Mortgages upon expiration are not renewed and owners are frequently compelled to resort to moneylenders who exact interest as high as zo% [Note: this is conservative] for short-tern loans . . . There are owners wo s  oe h u nstcental heatigThey would modernize apartments by enlarging rooms, placing new equipment in kitchens, installing adequate wiring . . . With doors to financing closed to them, owners have appealed to the city for aid and none has been forthcoming . . . No agency exists to help with the problem.

The type of building involved, whether it is a tenement or a historically valuable old town house or a purely commercial property, makes little difference. actually, in a blacklisred area. Just as it is not persons who are blacklisred, as such, neither are buildings, as such, bur rather the locality, as such,

During 1959, New York embarked on a small experimental program for conserving neighborhoods in Manhattan that on the one hand were getting no new building, but on the other hand were judged to be far from hopeless physically and much worth maving socially. Unforrunately, lenders had already judged just these neighborhoods to be hopeless. Merely so that building viola-- tions could be corrected, the city found it necessary to obtain state legislation setting up a \$15,o0o,ooo public loan fund for property owners in such neighborhoods to draw upon. Money for gradual change is so hard to get that a new loan authority has had to be created to supply even a pittance for the most rockbottom purposes. The legislation was drawn up so ineptly that the fund, as this is wricten, is almost unusable; and it is so small it cannot, in any case, make much difference to the city.

As already indicated, blacklisted localities can get money from conventional lenders again if the money comes in the forin of a cataclysm, and if it is thus employed to sort out incomes and uses in some approximation of Radiant Garden City.

Dedicating a privately financed Radiant City projecr in Harlem the Borough President of Aanhattan hailed the occasion as most significant because "in getting private financing che project sponsors have broken the barrier that banks have long maintained against substantial investment in new housing for Harlem."

The barrier, however, has been broken for no other type of invesnnent in Harlem than investment in project cataclysms.

Conventional credit will reappear too in a blacklisted district if the federal goverment will guarantee mortgages as generously as it does for suburban development and for new Radiant Garden City projeccs. Bur the federal goverment does not guarantee mortgages in sufficient amount to stimulate spor building or rehabilication except in ceribed renewal areas with an approved plan. An approved planmeans that even existing buildings must help shape the area into the nearest possible approximation of Radiant Garden City. Usually these renewal plans disperse-— even from low-density areas—between one-half and two-thirds of the original population. Again the money is used to finance camclysms. And it is not used to build city diversity but to erase it. When I asked an official involved in arrangements for a "sporclearance" renewal district why dispersed commerce was to be rooted our (inscead of more of it stimulated), and why business was to be confined to a monopolistic shopping center, imitating suburban life, he said, frst, that that represented good planning. He then added. "The question is academic anyhow. We couldn't get FHA approval on loans with mixed uses like that." He is right. There is no appreciable money available today for nurturing city districts ft for city life, and this is a situarion encouraged and often enforced by government. We have, therefore, no one to blame for this but ourselves.

Still another form of respectable money is available to blacklist districts: public housing project money. Although there is much prating about "vest-pocket projects," the vest in question seems to be Paul Bunyan's. This too is money that comes, almost invariably, in cataclysmic form, and always in the form of sorting out and price-tagging populations.

East Harlem—like the Lower East Sido-has received floods of such money. Back in 1942, East Harlem would have looked at least as good a possibility for unslumming as the North End. Only five years before, in 937, a sober study of the area, sponsored by the city, saw so much of hope and improvement occurring that it projected East Harlem as the logical center in New York of Italian-infuenced culture. The district possessed thousands of businesmen, handling businesses so stable and successful that in many cases the second or third generation was now running them. It had hundreds of cultural and social organizations. It was an area of much worn-out and poor housing (along with some good housi'ng and considerable unslumming housing), but also of immense vitality and with a great hold on many of its people. The district also possessed the city's main Puerto Rican community, which was miserably housed, but which contained many first-comers of the Puerto Rican immigration who were already emerging as leaders, and it contained an immense array of Puerto Rican cultural, social and business establishments.

After East Harlcm was written off by lenders in 194z, it too had little miracles. One area, near the foot of the Triborough Bridge, continued unslumming and rehabilitating in spite of every obstacle. The Housing Authority's own site managers, when they had to drive the people out so that a huge immured slum, Wagner Houses, could be built there instead, were amazed and myscified that improvements so substantial and plentiful should be wiped away. No miracle sufficiently sensational turned up to save East Harlem. To carry out their plans (even where these were not directly overridden by the city's plans), too many people eventally had to leave. Those who stayed in spite of the dis couragement to improvenent, and in spite of che havoc of the shadow-world money which poured into every cranny it could find, hung on by extraordinary measures and tenacity.

For it was as if East Harlem, in effect, had been decreed a backward and deprived country, financially apart from our normal national life. Even the branch banks were closed down throughout an area of more than 1oo,ooo people and thousands of businesses; merchants had to go out of the area simply to deposic their day's receipts. Even the system of school savings accounts was removed from the district's schools.

Eventually, much as the generosity of a rich nation might well extend massive aid to a deprived and backward country, into this district poured massive "foreign" aid, according to decisions by absentee experts from the remote continent inhabited by housers and planners. The aid poured in for rehousing people—some three hundred million dollars' worth. The more that poured in, the worse became the turmoils and troubles of East Harlem, and still more did it become like a deprived, backward country. More than t,3oo businesses which had the misfortune to occupy sites marked for housing were wiped away, and an estimated four-fifths of their proprietors ruined. More than 500 noncommercial "store-front" establishments were also wiped away. Virtually all the unslummed population which had hung on was rooted out and dispersed to "better iself."

Lack of money has hardly been the trouble in East Harlem. After the drought came fantastic floods. The money poured into East Harlem alone from the public housing treasuries is abour as much as was lost on the Edsel. In the case of a mistake like the Edsel, a point is reached when the expenditure is reappraised and halted. But in East Harlem, citizens today have to fight off still more money for repetitions of mistakes that go unappraised by those who control the money floodgates. I hope we disburse foreign aid abroad more intelligently than we disburse it at home.

Lack of gradual money wastes city districts already inherently fit for city life, and therefore with a great potential for rapid improvement. lt also means there is no hope for districts that lack one or more of the conditions for generating diversity, and need help in acquiring rhese supplements, as well as money for nornal changes and for worn-out structures.

Where is the money from conventional sources, which might be going into gradual change? Where does it go instead?

Some of it goes into planned cataclysms of redevelopment and renewal; more is going into the self-destruction of divcrsity, to the ruination of outstanding city success.

Much is not going into cicies at al, but instead into the outskirts of cities.

As Haar said, the credit authority is not only the power to destroy but the power to create and the power to divert. He was writing specifically of the goverament's credit authority, and the use of that authority to encourage suburb building rather than city building.

The immense new suburban sprawls of American cities have not come about by accident—and stll less by the myth of free choice between cities and suburbs. Endless suburban sprawl was made practical (and for many families was made acrually mandatory) through the creation of something the United States lacked until the mid-193o's: a national mortgage market specifically calculated to encourage suburban home building. Because of the certitude offered by government mortgage guarantees, a bank in New Haven could, would and does buy up mortgages on suburban housing in Souther California. A bank in Chicago buys up mortgages on suburban housing in lndianapolis one week, whilc an lndianapolis bank, the next week, buys them up for suburban housing outside Atlanta or Buffalo. Nor, nowadays, must these mortgages necessarily be government guaranteed. They can be a repetition, without the guarantees, of the kind of planningand building that is made routie nd accepted by the ur antees.

A national mortgage inarket has obvious advantages in bringing the demand for money together with a distant supply of money quickly and sensitively. But, particularly when it is diverted so heavily into one kind of growth, it has its disadvanmges too.

As the people of the Back-of-the-Yards found out, there is apt to be no relarionship between city-created and city-needed savios, and city building investment. So remote is the relationship that in 1959 when one of the savings barks in Brooklyn announced that 7o percent of its loans had been made close to home, the New York Times considered the fact sufficiently newsworthy to give it a big play on the business pages. Close to home is a definition with some elasticity. The 7o percent, it tumed out, had been used in Nassau County, a huge mess of new suburban sprawl on Long Islañd, out beyond Brooklyn. Meantime, much of Brooklyn lies under the sentence of the blacklisr.

City poople finance the building of suburbs. To be sure, one of the historic missions of cities, those marvelously productive and efficient places, is to finance colonization.

But you can run anything into the ground.

Obviously there have been changes in the sources of money for ciry building during the past thirty years. Money lending and spending have become more institutionalized than in the past. The counterparts of individuals who might have been lending money in the i92o's, for example, are today apt to be putting it into income tax and life insurance, and insofar as it is spent or lent for city building, it is spent or lent by the government or the life insurance company. Small local banks, like the New England oddity that lent money within its otherwise blacklisted neighborhood, disappeared in the Depression and in mergers after that time.

Does this mean, however, that our more institutionalized money nowadays can be used only cataclysmically? Are the great bureaucracies of money such big fish that they can operate only in cities of big fish, huge borrowers, immense and abrupt changes? Is a system which is able in one of its manifestations to retail credit, gently, for the purchase of encyclopedias and vacation trips, able in other manifestations only to distribute cred't violently in wholesale lots?

Th own internal necessicies and forces. Ir operates cataclysmically because we, as a society, have asked for jusr this. We thought it would be good for us, and we got it. Now we accept it as if it were ordained by God or the system.

Let us look, from the point of view of what we have asked for and what we have explicitly permitted, at the three kinds of money which shape our cities beginning with the most important, the conventional, nongovernmental sources of credit.

The idea of diverting huge sums of money to thin suburban growth at the expense of starving city districts was no invention of the morogage lenders (although they, as well as suburban huilders, have now acquired a vested interest in this routine). Neither the ideal nor the method of accomplishing it originated logically within our credit system itself. It originated with highminded social thinkers. By the 193o's, when the FHA methods for stimulating suburban growth were worked out, virtually every wise man of government—from right to left—was in favor of the objectives, although they might differ with one another on methods. A few years previously, Herbert Hoover had opened the first White House Conference on Housing with a polemic againsr the moral inferiority of cities and a panegyric on the moral virtues of simple cottages, small rowns and grass. At an opposite political pole, Rexford G. Tugwell, the federal administrator responsible for the New Deal's Green Belt demonstration suburbs, explained, "My idea is to go just outside centers of population, pick up cheap land, build a whole community and entice people into it. Then go back into the cities and tear down whole slums and make parks of them."

The cataclysmic use of money for suburban sprawl, and the concomitant starvation of all those parts of cites that planning orthodoxy stamped as slums, was what our wise men wanted for us; they put in a lot of effort, one way and another, to get it. We got it.

The delbera l snorh taysmiva for redevelopment and renewal projects is even more obvious. In the first place, society puts its ovm land clearance subsidy funds into these cataclysmic changes, purely to make financially possible the subsequent cataclysmic private investnenr. Society also oversees that the private investment is used specifically to create forms of pseudo-city and to combat urban diversity. So-. city g ill further, wihit ncentiveornewal more guarantees, but insists that the creation thus guaranteed be as

smtic as man can make it throughout the life of invesument.   
Gradual change is outlawed for the future.

Social sponsorship of these cataclysms is aken for granted. Thie publccun yb.

The publicunderstands less well thar in sponsoring these cataclysmic uses of private investnent in cities, it has also made and enforced choices among various differing forins of private investment.

To understand this, we must understand that public subsidies for land clearance or spot clearance are far from the only subsidies. Involuntary subsidies, immense in the aggregate, go into these enterprises too.

When land is acquired or redevelopment or renewal, it is acquired through the power of eminent domain, a power which belongs only to goverments. In addition, threat of acquisition un-. der eminent domain is used to enforce compliance to renewal schemes in parcels of property not actually acquired.

The power of eminent domain, long familiar and useful as a means of acquiring property needed for public use, is extended, under redevelopment law, to acquisition of property intended for private use and private proft. This distinction was the point on which the constitutionality of redevelopment and renewal law hung. The Supreme Court declared that society did have the right--through the medium of its legislatures—to make that kind of choice between private entrepreneurs and owners; it could take the properry of the one to beneft the other, as a means of achieving objects which, in the legislature's judgment, were for the public good.

T   w  oma  m ha m physically possible the assembly of projecr tracts. It also makes them financially possible, owing to the involunrary subsidy enmailed. This point of the involuntary subsidy was well explained by Anthony J. Panuch, a management expert, in a 196o report on New York City's housing and redevelopment snarl, prepared for the Mayor:

The direct consequence of the exercise of the power of eminent domain on the coinmercial tenant is drastic and often ruinous.

When the govemment condemns property ir is required to pay only for what it acquires for iself and not for what it takes from the owner.

The government is not in condemnation acquiring a business but only the premises. It need only pay for the premises. The proprietor gecs nothing for the loss of his business or goodwill, nor even for his unexpired lease because leases universally provide that upon condemnation the owner's lease contract with the tenant is automatically term inated with nocompensation to the tenant.

Alshough his entire propertyandhis full investnent is taken from h he ecives sbstantiallynig.

The report goes on to give an llustrarive case:

A druggist purchased a drug srore for more than \$4o,ooo. A few years later, the building in which his store was located was taken in condemnation. The toml sum which he eventually received was an award of \$3,ooo for fixtures and that sum had to be paid over to the chattel mortgagee. Thus his total investment was complerely wiped out.

This is'a sad and common story on housing or renewal sites, and is one reason these schemes are fought so desperately by site -businessmen. Theyare subsidizing these schemes, not with a fraction of their rax money, but with their livelihoods, with their children's college money, with years of their past put into hopes for the fuure—with nearly everything they have.

The Panuch report goes on to suggest what innumerable letters to editors, cirizens at public hearings. and newspaper editorials have already, in their own words, suggested: "The community as a whole should bear the expense of community progress and that cost should not be imposed upon the unfortunate victim of community progress."

The community as a whole has nor yet seen fit to bear that whole expense, and it is never going to. Redevelopment offcials and housing experts blanch when it is suggested. The expense of beaing the whole cost would nuake public subsidy costs for redevelopment and for housing projects too heavy. Ar present, redevelopment or private prot is iologically and scally juified on the grounds that the public subsidy investment will be retumed over a reasonable period in the form of increased taxes from the improvement. Were the involuntary subsidies which make these schemes possible included as public costs, the enlarged public costs would bear no conceivable relationship to anticipated tax returns. Public housing on its part is held to a current cost of \$17,ooo per dwelling unit. Were the involuntary subsidies absorbed as public cost, the expense of these dwellings would soar to politically unrealistic levels. Both of these operations, "renewal" projecis and public housing projects, with their wholesale destruction, are inherently wasteful ways of rehuilding cities, and in comparison with their full costs make pathetic contributions to city values. At present, society is protected from these facts of life because so high a proportion of the coss s visited upon involuntary victims and is nor offcially added in. But the cost is there. Project building as a forn of city transfornamake o enncallyhan ly.

Wh    en cataclysmic amounts of money into a regimented project or renewal scheme for a price-tagged population, it is not indulging in behavior somehow necessary to twentieth-century investinent funds. It is di ratr what scy has ecally skdr and has made possible only by employing quite extraordinary and ruthless social powers.

In the case of the catclysmuic use of conventional credit for the self-destruction of diversity, the situation is different. The cataclysmic effects in such cases arise, not from vast wholesaling of credit at all, but from the aggregate of many individual transactions which happen to be heavily concentratod in one locality in one period of time. Socicty has produced no deliberate stimulants to this destruction of outstanding city success. Bur neither has society done anything to hamper or to divert this form of citydestroying money flood.

Private invesiment shapes cities, but social ideas (and laws) shape private invcsment. First comes the image of what we want, then the machinery is adapted to turn out that image. The financial machinery has been adjusted to create anti-city images because, and only because, we as a society thought this would be good for us. If and when we think that lively, diversifed ciry, capable of continual, close-grained improvement and change, is e,  ua .

As for the cataclysmic use of public funds for city rebuilding, pose that this just happens because it happens. Public housing money is employed cataclysmically instead of for gradual, steady street and district improvement, because we thought eataclysms would be good for our slum dwellers--and a demonstration to the rest of us of the good city life.

There is no inherent reason why tax funds and public credit cannot be used to speed unslumming instead of slum shifting and slum immuring. Mechods entirely different from those now employed are possible for subsidizing housing. I shall discuss this question in the next chapter.

Nor is there any inherent reason why public buildings must be sr ut and assemble into civic nd cultural catacys. They can be built and located as ingredients of gradual change, to supplement and enliven their matrix of living city. We only do it the other way because we think it is right.

The shadow-world money is hard to control socially, but we could do much to hamper at least its cataclysmic effecrs. Blacklisting of localities opens wonderful opportun'ties to the cataclysmic use of exploitative money. To this degree, the problem is hardly the exploitative money itself, but the (socially encouraged) withholding of conventional investment.

Calysmi  governmental money lso afford, s a yproduct, wonderful opportunities for the money from the shadow world. To undetstand why this is so, we must undernd that slum landlords, unlike the drug-store proprietor in the Panuch report, benefit handsomely from blanket use of the powers of eminent domain. When a building is bought under the powets of eminent domain, three factors are customarily taken into account in setting the award (sale price). These are the assessed value of the properry, the replacement value of the building, and the current earning power of the building (as distinguished from the earning power of a business which may be conducted within it). The more exploited a building, the higher its earning power, and the more the owner is given. So profimble are such condemnation sales for slum landlords that some of them make a business of buying up buildings in areas already condemned, overcrowding them, and raising rents, less for the profits to be made in the interim than for the proits to be made by the building's sale to the public. To combat this particular racket, some cities have passed "quick-take" laws technically transferring to public ownership the title of properties on a condemnod site the day condemnation is approved—leaving negotiations on sale prices and appraisals to be worked outlater.

Wh pbi ihn from slum clearance. They can, and apparently often do, use the condemnation awards to buy more property than they formerly had, in new localities which they propose to convert to slums. If the new slum is later condemned, so much the betrer for such an investor's multiplying fortunes and holdings. In New York, some investors of this kind take not only their money with them to a new location, but also their former tenants, thereby helping the city solve the "relocation" problem. Slum shifting has its own efficiencies. It is self-fnancing.

Again, the cataclysmic use of shadow-world money to create new slums is hardly a problem entailing only the shadow-world money itself. To a degree, it is a problem that arises from (socially encouraged) slum shifting.

Finally, the cataclysmic use of shadow-world money could be better controlled through xation, as explained in the Panuch reporr:

No amount of code enforcement or rax abated housing rehabilitation by the New York City Housing Authority will be able to keep pace with slum formation, until and unless the profit is taken out of slums by taxation. [Taxation on the basis of profits is necessary] to overcome the effect of the Federal Income Tax structure, the depreciation and capital gains provisions of which make slum ownership a highly profitable speculation for slumlords. . . .

A slum owner in a congested area, where need for shelter is desperate and where the rents are what the traffic will bear, need not maintain the property. He pockets his annual depreciation allowance year after year, and after he has written down the book vaof his slum property to zero, he then sells it t a prie that capitalizes his high rent roll. Having made the sale, he pays a 25% capiralgains tax on the difference between the book value and the sales price. He then acquires another slum property and goes through the same process again. [Saturation inspection by the Bureau of Internal Revenue of the income returns of owners of slum properties would] determine the amount of back taxes and penalties due as a result of their pocketing any improperly claimed depreciation allowance.

Cynics—or at least the cynics 1 talk to-think that pickings are made so easy nowadays for exploitative money in cities because the investment shadow world represents powerful interests, with a big say somewhere behind the legislative and administrative scenes. I have no way of knowing whether this is true. However, I should think that apathy on the part of the rest of us has something to do with the situation. Soine professional housers, roday, have a plausible rationalization for the profits the shadow world takes asa by-product of city rebuilding operarions. "Society has created the slums," they say, "and it is only right that society should pay what is needed to wipe them out." Putting it in these terms, however, evades the question of who is being paid by society, and where the money goes next. The apathy is abetted, also, by the comfortable thought that the problem of slums is being overcome anyway by wiping out old slum buildings. Nothing could be less true.

It is so easy to blame the decay of cities on traffic . .  or immigrants . or the whimsies of the middle class. The decay of cities goes deeper and is more complicared. It goes right down to what we chink we want, and to our ignorance about how cities work. The forns in which money is used for city building—or withheld from use are powerful instruments of city decline to day. The forms in which money is used must be converted co instruments of regeneration—from instruments buying violent cataclysus to instruments buying continual, gradual, complex and gentler change.

Part Four DIFFERENT TACTICS
