> 来源：The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 19 Visual order: its limitations and possibilities

When we deal with cities we are dealing with life at its most complex and intense. Because this is so, there is a basic esthetic limitation on what can be done with cities: A city carnot be a work of art.

We neod ar, in the arrangements of cities as well as in the other realms of life, to lelp explain life to us, to show us meanings, to illuminate the relationship berween the life that each of us embodies and the life outside us. We nced art most, perhaps, to reassure us of our own humanity. However, although art and life are interwoven, they are not the same things. Confusion between them is, in part, why efforts at city design are so disappointing. It is impontant, in arriving at better design strategies and mctics, to clear up chis confusion.

Art has its own peculiar forns of order, and they are rigorous. Arists, whatever their medium, make selections from the abounding materials of life, and organize these selections into works that are under the control of the arist. To be sure, the artist has a sense that the demands of the work (i.e., of the selections of material he has made) control him. The rather miraculous result of this process—if the selectivity, the organizstion and the control are consistent within themselves can be art. But the essence of this process is disciplined, highly discriminatory selectivity from life. In relation to the inclusiveness and the literally endless intricacy of life, art is arbitrary, symbolic and abstracted. That is its value and the sourcc of its own kind of order and coherence,

To approach a city, or even a city neighborhood, as if it were a larger architectural problem, capable of being given order by converting it into a disciplined work of art, is to nake the mistake of attempting to substitute art for life.

The results of such profound confusion between art and life are neither life nor art. They are taxidermy. In its place, mxidermy can be a useful and decent craft. However, it goes too far when the specimens put on display are exhibicions of dead, sruffed cities.

Like allattempts at  which get fr away fom the truth and whic loserespe or what th al with, this cra ciy idermy becomes, in the hands of its mastcr practitioners, continually more picky and precious. This is the only form of advance possible to it.

All this is a life-killing and art-killingmisuse of a.The results impoverish life instead of enriching it.

To be sure, it is possible for the creation of art not to be so indiviualisa p as sualisir y.

Under certain circumstances, the creation of art can apparently be done by general, and in effect anonymous, consensus. For instance, in a closed society. a technologically hampered society, or an arrested society, either hard necessity or tradition and custom can enforce on everyone a disciplined selectivity of purposes and materials, a discipline by consensus on what those materials demand of their organizers, and a disciplined control over the forms thereby created. Such societies can produce villages, and maybe even their own kinds of cities, which look to us like works of aπ in their physical totalicy.

But this is not the case with us. For us, such societies may be inreresting to ponder; and we may regard their harmonious works with admiration or a kind of nostalgia, and wonder wistfully why we can't be like that.

We can't be like that because che limitations on possibilitics and the strictures on individuals in such societies exrend much beyond the materials and conceptions used in creating works of arc from the grist of everyday life. The limitations and strictures extend into every realm of opportunity (including intellectual opportun ty) and into relationships among people themselves. These limitations and strictures would seem to us an unnecessary and intolerable stultification of life. For all our conformity, we are too adventurous, inquisitive, egoistic and competitive to be a harmonious society of artists by consensus, and, what is more, we place a high value upon the very trairs that prevent us from being so. Nor is this the constructive use we make of cities or the reason we find them valuable: to embody tradition or to express (and freeze) harmonious consensus.

Nineteenth-century Utopians, wich their rejection of urbanized society, and with their inheritance of eighteenth-century romanticism about the nobility and simplicity of "natural" or primitive man, were much attracted to the idea of simple environments that were works of art by harmonious consensus. To get back to this condition has been one of the bopes incorporated in our tradition of Utopian reform.

This furile and deeply reactionary) hope tinctured the Utopianism of the Garden City planning movement too and, at least ideologically, somewhat gentled its more dominanc theme of harmony and order imposed and frozen by authoritarian planning.

The hope for an eventual, simple environment formed of art by consensus—or rather, a ghostly vestige of that hope—has continued to fit through Garden City planning theory when it has kept itself pure from Radiant City and City Beautiful planning. Thus, as late as the 193o's, Lewis Mumford in The Cultureof Cities gave an importance, which would be puzzling indeed in the absenice of this tradition, to pusuits like basket weaving, pottery making and blacksmithing in the planned communities he envisioned for us. As late as the 195o's, Clarence Stein, the leading

American Garden Ciry planner, on the occasion of receiving the American Institute of Architects' gold medal for his contributions to architectural progress, was casting about for some object which might suitably be created by harmoni ous consensus in the ideal communities he envisioned. He suggested that citizens could be allowed to build a nursery school, of course with their own hands. But the gist of Stein's message was that, aside from the conceded nursery school, the complete physical environment of a community and all the arrangements that comprise it must be in the total, absolute and unchallenged control of the project's architects.

This i, of course, o different from the Radiant ity and Ciy Beautiful assumptions. These always were primarily architectural design cults, rather than cults of social reform.

Indircctly through the Utopian tradition, and directly through the more realistic doctrine of art by imposition, modem city planning has bcen burdened from its beginnings with the ursuitable aim of converting cities into disciplined works of art.

Like the housers who face a blank if they try to think what to do besides income-sorting projects, or the highwaymen who face a blank if they try to think what to do besides accommodate more cars, just so, architects who venture into city design often face a blank in trying to create visual order in cities except by substituting the order of arr for the very different order of life. They cannot do anything else much. They cannot develop alternate mctics, for they lack a straregy for des 'ign that will help cities.

Instead of attempting to substitute art for life, city designers should return to a strategy ennobling both to a and to:a strategy of illuminating and clarifying life and helping to explain to us is meanings and order—in this case, helping to illuminate, clarify and explain the order of cities.

We are constantly being told simple-minded lies about order in cities, talked down to in effect, assured that duplication represeots order. It is the easiest thing in the world toseize hold of a few forms, give them a regimented regularity, and try to palm this off in the name of order. However, simple regimented regularity and significant systems of functional order are seldom coincident in this world.

To see complex systems of functional order as order, and not as chaos, takes understanding. The leaves dropping from the trees in the autumn, the interior of an airplane engine, the entrails of a dissected rabbit, the city desk of a newspaper, all appear to be chaos if they are seen without comprehension. Once they are understood as systems of order, they actually look different.

Because we use cities, and therefore have expetience with them, most of us already possess a good groundwork for uaderstanding and appreciati'ng their order. Some of our trouble in comprehending it, and much of the unpleasant chaotic effect, comes from lack of enough visual reinforcements to underscore the functional order, and, worse still, from unnecessary visual contradictions.

It is fruitless, however, to search for some dramatic key element or kingpin which, if made clear, will clarify all. No single element in a city is, in truth, the kingpin or the key. The mixture itself is kingpin, and its mutual support is the order.

When city designers and planners try to find a design device tha will express, i clear n ay fashon, the keleton y structure (expressways and promenades are current favorites for this purpose). they are on fundamentally the wrong track. A city is not put together like a mammal or a steel frame building—or even like a honeycomb or a coral. A city's very structure consists of mixture of uses, and we get closest to is structural secrets when we deal with the conditions that generate diversity.

Being a structural system in its own right, a city can best be understood straightforwardly in is own terms, rather than in terms of some other kinds of organisms or objects. However, if logy is to imagine a large field in darkness. In the field, many fires are burning. They are of many sizes, some great, others small; some far apart, others dotted close together; some are brightening, some are slowly going out. Each fire, large or small, extends its radiance into the surrounding murk, and thus it only to the extent that the light from the fire creates it.

The murk has no shape or pattern except where it is carved into space by the light. Where the murk between the lights becomes deep and undefinable and shapeless, the only way to give it form or structure is to kindle new fires in the murk or sufficiently enlarge the nearest existing hres.

On val i  prt, appropriate structure and shape. Kevin Lynch, in his book The Image of the City, mentions the phenomenon of "lost" areas, places that the people he interviewed completely ignored and were actually unaware of unless reminded, although it would seem the locations of these "lost" places by no means merited this oblivion, and sometimes his observers had just traversed them in actuality or in imagination.

Wherever the fires of use and vitality fail to extend in a city is a place in the murk, a place essentially without city forri and structure. Without that vital light, no seeking for "skeletons" or k  hc an  i into a city form.

These metaphoric space-defining fires are formod—to get back to rangible realities by areas where diverse city uses and users give each other closegrained and lively support.

This is the essential order which city design can assist. These areas of vitality need to have their remarkable functional order clarihed. As cities get more such areas, and less gray area or murk, the need and the opportunities for clarification of this order will increase.

Whatever is done to clarify this order, this intricate life, has to be done mainly by tactics of emphasis and suggestion.

Suggestion-the part standing for the whole—is a principal means by which art communicates; this is why aπt often tells us so much with such economy. One reason we understand this communicarion of suggestion and symbol is that, to a certain extent, it is the way all of us see life and the world. We constantly make organized selections of what we consider relevant and consistent from among all the things that cross our senses. We discard, or tuck into some secondary awareness, the impressions that do not make sense for our purposes of the moment--unless those irrele-· vant impressions are too strong to ignore. Depending on our purposes, we even vary our selecti'ons of what we take in and organize. To this extent, we are all artists.

This artribure of art, and this attribute in the way we see, are qualities on which the practice of city design can bank and which it can turn to advantage.

Designers do not need to be in literal control of an entire field of vision to incorporate visual order in cities. Art is seldom ploddingly literal, and if it is, it is poor stuf. Literal visual contrlin c  usuall a b  veyboy u edesgner e and sometimes after it is done, it bores them too. It leaves no discovery or organization or interest for anybody else.

The ac ee  gnh e p themselves, order and sense, instead of chaos, from what they see.

Stre povidehe icial il  s.

However, too many streets present our eyes with a profound and confusing contradiction. In the foreground, they show us all kinds of detail and activity. They make a visual arnouncement (very useful to us for understanding the order of cities) that this is an intense life and that into its composition go many diferent things. They make this announcement to us not only because we may see considerable activi'ty itself, but because we see, in different types of buildings, signs, store fronts or other enterprises or institurions, and so on, the inanimate evidences of activity and diversity, However, if such a street goes on and on into the distance, with the intensity and intricacy of the foreground apparently dribbling into endless amorphous reperitions of itself and finally petering into the utter anonymity of distance, we are also getting a visual announcement that clearly says endlessnes.

In terms of all human experience, these two announcements, one telling of great intensity, the other telling of endlessness, are hard to combine into a sensible whole.

One or the other of these two conflicting sets of impressions has to take precedence. The viewer has to combat or try to suppress the other set of impressions. Either way, it is diffcuit nor to sense confusion and disorder. The more lively and varied the foreground (that is. rhe better its innate order of diversity), the sharper, and therefore the more disturbing, the contradiction of the two announcements can be. If too many streets embody this conflict, if they stamp a district or a whole city with this equivocation, the general effect is bound to be chaotic.

There are,of course, two ways of trying to see such a street. If a person gives the long view precedence, with its connotations of repetition and infnity, then the close-up scene and the intensity it conveys seem superfluous and offensive. I think this is the way that many architecturally trained viewers see city streets, and this is-one reason for the impatience, and even contempt, that many (not all) of those who are architecturally trained express for the physical evidences of city diversity, freedom and life.

If rhe foreground view, on the other hand, takes precedence, then the endless repetition and continuation into lost, indefinite distances becomes the superfuous, offensive and senseless element. I think this is the way most of us look at city sreers most of the time, because this is the viewpoint of a person whose purpose it is to use what exists on that street, rather than to look at it in detachment. Looking at the streer in this way, the viewer makes sense. and at least a minimum amount of order, from the intimate view, but only at the price of considering the distance as a deplorable mishmash, better dismissed from mind if possible.

To bring even a chance for visual order to most such streets—- and to districts in which such streets predominate—this basic contradiction of strong visual impressions has to be dealt wich. I think rhis is what European visitors are getcing at when they remark, as they often do, that the ugliness of our cities is owing to our gridiron street systems.

The functional order of the city demands that the intensity and diversity be there; their evidences can be removed from the street only at the cost of destroying necesary functional order.

On the other hand, however, the order of the city does not demand the impression of endlessness; this impression can be minimized without interfering with functional order. Indeed, by so doing, the really significant attribute of intensity is reinforced.

Therefore a good many city streers (not all) need visual interruprions, cutting off the indefinite distant view and at the same time visually heightening and celebrating intense street use by giving it a hintof enclosure and entity.

Old parts of our cities which have irregular street patterns frequently do this. However, they have the disadvantage of being difficule to understand as street systems; people easily get lost in them and have a difficult time keeping them mapped out in their heads.

Where the basic strect pattern is a gridiron plan, which has many advantages, there are two main ways, nevertheless. of introducing sufficient visual irregularities and interruptions into the city scene.

Teean   ial ee whees of the gridiron plan are too far apart from each other—as on the West Side of Manhattan, for example: in short, where additional streets are necessary in any case for the functional purpose of helping to generate diversity.

If such new streets are added economically, with a decent respect and restrai'nt for saving the most valuable, the most handsome, or the most various among buildings that lie in their potencial paths, and also with the aim of incorporating sides or rears of existing buildings into their frontages whercver possible. to give a mixture of age, rhen these new streets are seldom going to be straight for great length. They are going to have bends in them and somerurres a considerablc tangent. Even a straight street curting one former large block into two snnill blocks will not likely form a continuous straight line with is extensions through the next block and the next and next, indefinirely. There are cer.- tain to be T junctures where these offset street scgments meet intersecting streers at right angles. Ordinary prudence and respect for city variety, combined with an awareness that irregularity in thesc cases is an advantage in itsclf, can determine the best of various potential alternative paths for new extra streets. The least material destruction should be combined with max'imum visual gain; these two aims are not in confict.

Subsidiary irregularity within a dominant grid system is not difficult to understand. Extra streets like these, introduced in between the grid streets, could even be named in recognition of their relationship to the grid.

The combination of a basic, easiy nderstandable grid systm, together with purposely irregular streets dropped in where the grid is too large for good city functioning, could be, I think, a distinctive and most valuable American contribution to the tactics of city design. \*

The second means for inrducing irregularities and visaliterruptions where they are insufficient, is on grid streets themselves.

San Francisco is a city with many natural visual interruptions in a gridiron street pattern. San Francisco's streets, in general, are regular gridiron arrangements in two-dimensional plan; however, in three-dimensional topography they are masterpieces of visual interruption. The many and abrupt hills constantly make separations between the nearby scene and the distance, and this is true whether one is looking along a stteet toward a rise, or looking down a slope. This atrangement greatly emphasizes the intimate and immediate strcet scenes, without sacrificing the clarity of gridiron organization.

C wt  ty o uc happy accident by natural means. However, they too can introduce visual interruptions into straight and regular street patterns without sacrificing clarity of organization and movement. Bridges that connect two buildings up above a streer sometimncs do this service; so do buildings which themselves bridge a street. Occasional large buildings (preferably with public significance) can be placed across straight streets at ground level. Grand Central Terminal in New York is a well-known example.\*

Straight, "endless" streets can be interrupted and the street itself divided around a square or plaza forining the interruption; this square can be occupied by a building. In cases where vehicular traffic can actually be dead-ended on straight streets, small parks could be thrown across from sidewalk to sidewalk; the visual interruption or diversion would be provided here by grovés of trees or by small (and, let us hope, cheerful) park structures.

In still other cascs, a visual diversiun need not extend across a straight streer, but can be in the forn of a building or group of buildings set forward from the normal building line to make a jog, with the sidewalk cut underneath. Another form of jog is a plaza at one side of the street, which makes the building beyond stand out as a visual interruption,

it might be supposed that all this visual emphasis on inteniy of streer use would be rather overwhelming or even inhuman. ut this is not so. Distticts with many visual street interruptions do not, in real ie, tend to intimidate or overwhelm people; hey are more apt to be characterized as "f riendly" and also to be comprehensible as districts. After all, this is intensity of human life which is being acknowledged and emphasized and, what is more, emphasized in its understandable, close-up aspect. It is city infinity and repet'tion which generally seem overwhelming, inhuman and incomprehensible.

There can be pitfalls, however, in the use of visual street interruptions.

F   h talc of streer intensity and demil to ell. If a street is, in cruth, a long repetition of one kind of use, providing thin activity, then visual interruption dow not clarify the existing forin of order here, Visual enclosure of practically nothing (in terms of city intensity) can hardly be more than a design affcctation. Visual interruptions and vistas will not, in themselves, bring city vitality and intensity or their accompanimens of safety, interest, casual public life and economic opportunity. Only the four basic generators of diversity can do that.

Second, it is unnecessary, and would even become boring in its own way, for all city stroets to have visual interruptions, After all a big city is a big place, and there is nothing wrong in acknowledging or suring this fact too from rime to time. (Another of the advantages of San Francisco's hills. for instancc, is that the views from them do precisely this, and they do it at the same time as they are separating the distance from the immediate street view.) Occasional endlessness, or else focal endings far in the distance on streets, lend varicty. Some streets that cun into borders such as b  wacusort oun hould without visual interruptions. Not every street that terminates in a border need reveal this fact, but some of them should, both to introduce distant glimpses of what is different, and to convey casual messages about the whereabouts of the border—a form of orientarion clue, incidentally, that Lynch found very important to the people he interviewed for his study of ciry "imageability."

Thirdisual street interruptions should be, in functional ters, not dead ends, but "corners." Actual physical cut-offs to foot traffic in particular are destructive in cities. There should always be a way around the visual interruption or through it, a way that is obvious as a person reaches it, and that then lays out before the eyes a new strcct scene. This seductive attribute of designed interruptions to the eye was summed up neatly by the late archi-Ell Saarinn, s eportedhav id explai his own design premises, "There must always be an end in view, and the end must not be final."

Fourch, visual interruptions get their force parrially from being excepions to the rule. Too many of the same kind can cancel chemselves out. For instance, if plazas along the side of a street are plentiful, the srreet disintegrates visually as a streer, to say nothing of going dead functionally. Jogs with arcades beneath, street and can even become claustrophobic in their effect.

Fifth, a visual street interruption is a natural eye-catcher and its own character has much to do with the impressions madc by the entire scene. If it is banal, vacuous or merely messy, it might better not exist. A gas station or a bunch of billboards or a vacant and neglected building in such a place casts a pall out of all proportion to irs size. A visual street incerruption which is also beautiful is great luck, but when we go after beauty too solemnly in cities we usually seem to end up with pomposity. Beauty is not around for the asking, but we can ask that visual intertuptions be decent and even interesting.

Landmarks, as their name says, are prime orientation clues. But good landmarks in cities also perforin two other services in clarifying the order of cities. Eissr, they emphasize (and also dignify) the diversity of citiest they do this by calling attention to the fact that they are different from their neighbors, and important because they are different. This explicit statement about themselves carries an implicit statement about the composition and order of cities. Second, in certain instances landmarks can make important to our eyes city areas which are important in functional fact but need to have that fact visually acknowledged and dignified.

By understanding these other services, we can understand why many different uses are eligible and useful as city landmarbs, depending on their contexts in the city.

Let us first consider the role of landmarks as announcers and dign'ifiers of diversity. One reason a landmark can be a landmark is of course, that it is in a spot where it shows to advantage. But in addicion, it is necessary that the landmark be distinctive as a thing itself, and it is whis poiot with which we are now concerned.

Not all city landmarks are buildings. However, buildings are the principal landmarks in cities and the principles which make them serve well or ill apply also to most other kinds of landmarks, such as monuments, dramati'c fountains, and so on.

Satisfying distinction in the appearance of a building almost always grows out of distinction in its use, as discussed in Chapter Twelve. The same buildmg can be physically distinctive in one matrix because its use is distinctive in that context, but can be undistinctive in another setting where its use is the rule rather than the exception. The distinctiveness of a landmark depends considerably on reciprocity between the landmark and is neighbors.

In New York, Trinity Church, at the head of Wall Street, is a well-known and effective landmark. But Trinity would be relatively pallid as an element of city design if it were merely one .among an assemblage of churches or even of other symboliclooking insritutions. Trinity's physical distinction, which is nything but pallid i  settig depe part  o lanm site—at a T intersection and a rise in ground—but it also depends greatly on Trinity's functional distinction in its context of office buildings. So dominant is this fact of difference that Trinity makes a satisfying climax for its street scene, even though it is much snailer than in neighbors. An office building of this size (or any size) at this same advantageous spot, in this context, simply could not perform this service nor convey this degree of visual order, let alone do it with suchunlabored andnatural"righmess.

Just so, the New York Public Library buiding, set in its commercial matrix at Fifth Avenue and Forty-second Streer, forms an excellent landmark, bur this is no true of the public libraries of San Francisco, Pitrsburgh and Philadelphia, as examples. These have the disadvantage of being sct among institutions which con-.

Back in Chapter Eight, which deals with the need for mixed primary uses, I discussed the functional value of dorting imporrant civic buildings within the workaday city, instead of assembling them into cultural or civic projects. In addition to the functional awkwardnesses and the economic waste of primary diversity that these projects cause, the buildings assembled into such islands of pomp are badly underused as landmarks. They pale each other, although each one, by itself, could make a tremendously effective unpression and symbol of city diversity. This is serious, because we badly need more, not fewer, city landmarks —great landmarks and small.

Sometimes atrempts are made to give a building landmark quality simply by making it bigger than its neighbors, or by turring ic out with stylistic differences. Usually, if the use of such a building is essentially the same as the uses of its neighbors, it is pallid—try as it might. Nor does such a building do us that extra service of clarifying and dignifying diversity of uses. Indeed, it tries to tell us that what is important in the order of cities are mere differences in size or outward dress. Except in very rare cases of real architectural masterpieces, this statement that style or size is everything.gets from city users, who are not so dumb, about the affection and attention it deserves.

.However, it should be noted that some buildings which depend

## 386] THE DEATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES

. on size for their distinction do provide good landmark orientation service and visual interest for people at a distance. In New York, the Empire State Building and the Consolidated Edison Tower with its great illuminated clock are examples. For people seeing them from the streets close by, these same buildings, inconsequential in their differences from neighboring buildings, are inconsequential as landmarks. Philadelphia City Hall, with its tower surinounted by the statue of vVilliam Penn, makes a splendid landmark from afar; and its true, not superficial, difference within its intimate matrix of city also makes it a splendid landmark from close by. For distant landmarks, size can sometimes serve. For intimate landmarks, distinction of usc and a statement about che importance of differences are of the essence.

can be a local landmark, by virtue of is special use in its surroundings, combined with visibility. Many different uses can serve as landmarks, provided they are special in their own context. For instance, people from Spokane, Washington, say that a physically distinctive and beloved landnark there is the Davenport Hotel, which serves, as hotels sometimes do, also as a unique and major center of city public life and assembly. In a place that is mainly residential, working places that ate well seen can make landmarks, and often do. .

Some ourdoor spaces that are focal centers, or, as they are sometimes called, nodes, behave very much like landmarks and get much of their power as clarifiers of order from the distinctiveness of their use, just as in the case of landmark buildings. The plaza at Rockefeller Center in New York is such a place; to users of the city on the ground in its vicinity it is much more of a "Iandmark" than the towering structure behind it or the lesser towers further enclosing it.

Now let us consider that second extra service which landmarks can perforin to clarify the order of cities: their ability to help state explicicly and visually that a place is important which is in truth functionally important.

Centers of activity, where the paths of many people come together in concentrated fashion, are important places economically and socially in cities. Sometimes they are important in the life of a city as a whole, sometimes to a particular district or neighborhood. Yet such centers may not have the visual distinction or importance merited by the functional truith. When this is the case, a user is being given contradicrory and confusing information. The sight of the activity and the intensity of land use says Importance. The absence of any visual climax or dignifying object says Unimportance.

Because commerce is so predominant in most city centers of activity, an effective landmark in such a place usually needs to be overtly uncommercial.

People become deeply attached ro landmarks that occur in centers of activity and in this their instincrs about city order are correct. In Greenwich Village, the old Jefferson Market Courthouse, now abandoned as a courthousc, occupics a prominent site abutting on one of the community's busiesr areas. It is an elaborate Victorian building, and opinions differ radically as ro whether it s architecturally handomeor rchiecturallyuly. However, there is a remarkable degree of unanimity, even among those who do not like the building as a building, that it must be resined and used for something. Citizens from the area, as well. as architecrural students working under their direction, have devoted immense amounts of time to detailed study of the building interior, its condition and its potentialities. Existing civic organizations have put time, effort and pressure into the job of saving it, and a new organization was even started to finance the repair of the public clock on the tower and get it going! The Public Library syste, having been shown the architcura and economic practicality, has now asked the city for funds to convert the building to a major branch library.

Why all the to-do over a peculiar building on a centrally located site which could make a lot of quick money for somebody and some extra taxes for the city, if it were used for commerce and residences, like most sites around it?

Functionally, it happens that just such a difference in use as a library is needed here, to help counter the self-destruction of diversity. However, few people are aware of this functional need, or conscious that just such a building can help to anchor diversity. Rather, there seems to be a strong popular agreement thar eisually the whole busy neighborhood of this landmark will lose irs point—in short, its order will blur rather than clarify—if this landmark is replaced by a duplication of the uses that already exist around it.

Even an inherently meaningles landmark in a center of accivity seems to contributc to the users' satisfaction. For instance, in St. Louis there stands a tall concrete column in the niddle of a down-at-heel commercial center in declining, gray area surroundings. It once served as a water tower. Many years ago, when the water tank was removed, the local cic'izens prevailed on City Hall to save the pedestal, which they themselves then repaired. It still gives to the district its name, "The Watertower," and it still gives a bit of pathetic discinction to ics district too, which would otherwise hardly even be recognizable as a place.

As clarifiers of city order, landmarks do best when they are set right anidst their neighbors, as in the case of all the examples I have mentioned. If they are buffered off and isolated from the generalized scene, they are contradicting, instead of explaining and visually reinforcing, an inportant fact about city differences: that they support each other. This too needs to be said by suggestion.

Eye-catchers, as already mentioned in the case of visual street interruptions, have an importance in city appearance out of all prion to the physicl spacetheyo.

Som ee-catchers are e-catcers jut by virtue of what they are, rather than because of precisely wbere they are: an odd building orinstance, or a little group of diering buildings tand ing out, because of themselves, in the wide-angle view across a park space. I think it is neither necessary nor desirable to try deliberately to create or to control this category of eye-catchers. Where diversity is generated, where there is mixture in building ages and types, and where there are opportunity and welcome for many people's plans and tastes, eye-catchers of chis kind always turn up, and they are more surprising, various and interesting than anyone, aiming primarily at ciy design, could deliberately plan. Truth is stranger than fiction.

Other eye-catchers, however, are eye-catchers because of pre cisely where they are, and these are necessary to consider as a deliberate part of city design. First of all, there must be spot that simply as locations, do catch the eye\~-for example, visual street interruptions. Second, these spots must count for something. These highly visible spots are few and exceptional; they are only one or twe among many scores of buildings and locations comprising a street scene. We cannot therefore depend on the law of averages or on chance alone to deliver us visual accents in exactly these natural eye-catcher spots. Often, no more is needed than a good paint color (and a subtraction of billboards) on a building that already exists. Sometimes a new building or new use is needed in these spots—even a landmark. By raking care with the relatively very few spots that are inevitable eye-catchers, much character, interest and accent can be given to a whole scene by suggestion, and with the least desi egimentation and the greatst enoy of means and tactics.

The importance of such places, and the importance of making them count are points well made in Planming and Conmunity Appearance, a booklet prepared by a committee of New York planners and architecis formed to investigate the problems of municipal design conttol. The committe's principal recommendation was that the crucial visual spots in a community be idencihed, and that these small spots be zoned to require exceptional treatment. No good can come, said the committee's report, of blandly including such eye-catching locations in general schemes of zoning and planning.\* Their locations alone give buildings on these few sites special and exceptional significance, and when we ignore that fact we are ignoring the most tangible realities.

There are some city streets which, in the absence of excellent eye-catchers, or even in addition to eye-catchers, need another kind of design help too. They need unif ying devices, to suggest .

I have mentioned, in Chapter Twelve, a tactic suitable for some streers of mixed residences and commerce, to prevent them from being visually exploded or disintegrated by incongruously large uses. The suitable tactic for visual unity on these streets, as already explained, is to zone a limit on the length of street frontage permitted any single enterprise.

For another family of street unifying tactics, we can exploit the principle that a strong, but otherwise unobtrusive, design element can tie together in orderly fashion much happenstance detail. This kind of unification can be useful on streets that are hcavily used, much seen and contain much detail without much real variety of use\~strects almost entirely commercial, for instance.

One of the simplest such devices is trees along the stretch to be unihed, but trees planted close enough together to give a look of continuity when they are seen close up, as well as when the space between them is elided by distance. Pavements have possibilities as unifers; that is, sidewalk pavements with strong, simple patterns. Awnings in strong colors have possibilities.

Each strcet that needs this kind of help is its own problem, and probably needs its own solution.\* There is a pitfall inhcrent in unification devices. One reason for a unifier's power is that it is special to a place, The sky itself, in a way, ties together nearly every scene, but its very ubiquity makes it an ineffective visual unifier of most scenes. A unifier supplies only the visual suggestion of entity and order; the viewer does most of the job of unifying by using the hint to help him organize what he sees. lf he sees exactly the same unifier in otherwise disparate places and scenes, he will soon unconsciously discount it.

All these various tactics for capturing city visual order are concerned with bits and pieces in the city—bits and pieces which are, to be sure, knit into a city fabric of use that is as continuous and little cut apart as possible. But emphasis on bits and pieces is of the essence: this is what a city is, bits and pieces that supplement each other and support each other.

The effects of various kinds of unifers—as well as of visual interruptions good and bad. landmarks and much else—are picrured and explained in two remarkable books on design in English cities, towns and counaryside, Ourage and Coumier Attack, both by Gordon Cullen and Ian Nacsn.

Perhaps this all seems very commonplace compared with the sweep and swoop of highways, or the eerily beautiful beehive huts of tribal krals. But what we have to express in expressing our cities is not be be scorned. Their intricate order-a manifestarion of the freedom of countless numbers of people to make and carry out countless plans—is in many ways a great wonder. We oughr not to be reluctant to make this living collection of interdependent uses, this freedom, this life, more understandable for what it is, nor so unaware that we do not know what it is.
