> 来源：The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs)\The Death and Life of Great American Cities (Jane Jacobs).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 20 Salvaging projects

One of the unsuimble ideas behind projects is the very notion that they are projects, abstracted out of the ordinary ciry and set apart. To think of salvaging or improving projects, as projects, is to repeat this root mistake. The aim should be to get that project, that patch upon the city, reworen back into the fabric—and in the process of doing so, strengthen the surrounding fabric too.

Reweaving projects back into the city is necessary not only to bring life to dangerous or inert projects themsclves. It is also necesary for larger district planning. Cut up physically by projects and their border vacuums, handicapped socially and economically by the isolation of too small neighborhoods, a city district cannot bc a district in truth, coherent enough and large enough to count.

The underlying principles for bringing life to a project site irself and to the borders where it must be rejoincd with the disorict are the same as the principles for heiping any city area where vitality is low. The planners have to diagnose which conditions for generating diversity are missing here—whether there is a lack of mixed primary uses, whether the blocks are too large, whether there is insufficient mixture in ages and types of buildings, whether the concentration of people is great enough. Then, wharever among those conditions is missing has to be supplied—usually gradually and opportunistically—as best it can be. -

In the case of housing projects, the fundamenl problems can be much like those presented by unplanned. low-vitality gray areas and engulfed former suburbs. In the case of nonresidenrial projects, such as cultural or civic centers, the fundamental problems can be much like those presented by has-been parts of downtowns which have suffered the self-desrruction of diversity.

However, because projects and their borders present special kinds of obstacles to supplying the condirions necessary for generating diversity (and sometimes special kinds of obstacles to the process of unslumming too), their salvage does require some special tactics.

The projects that today most urgently need salvaging are low-income housing projects. Their failures drasrically affcct the everyday lives of many pcople, especially children. Moreover, because they are too dangerous, demoralizing and unstable within themselves, they make it too hard in many cases to maintain tolerable civilization in their vicinities. Immense investmcnts have gone into federal- and state-financed housing projects; these expenditures, in spite of having been ill conceived, are too large to write off, even for a country as rich as ours. To salvage the investments themselves, the projects must be converted into the asses to human ie and to cities that it was hoped they would come.

These projects, like any slums, need to be unslummed. This means, among other things, that they must be capable of holding their populations through choice. It means they must be safe and othervise workable for city life. They need, among other things, casual public characters, lively, well-watched, continuously used public spaces, easier and more natural supervision of children, and norinal city cross-use of their territory by people from out-o  o  b j h poe  tk l  ealt fabric themselves.

The easiest way to et at this proble mentally is to imagine, , that e project round level, right up to perimr roadbods, is vimually a clean and empty slate. Above it foat the apartment houses, attached to the ground only by their stairs and elevator stacks. All kinds of things can be done on this almost clean slate.

In real life, to be sure, this theoretical clean slate will not always be so clean as that. Sometimes there are other fixed features besides eevators and stairs on that ground-level plane. Some proeces contain on their grounds schools or settleinent houses or churches. Once in a while there are large trees that ought to be kept if possible, and very occasionally indeed there is some outdoor space which works well enough and is unique enough to hold on to.

The grounds of newer projects—and especially most of those built since 195o-—automatically make much cleaner ground-level slates than older projects, when thought of in this way. This is because, as cime has gone on, housing project design has become ever more a routine matter of plunking down ever higher towers in ever more vacuous settings.

On this slate new streers must be designed: real streets which are to receive buildings and new uses along them; not "promenades" through vacuous "parks." These streets must be laid out in small blocks. Small public parks should be included to be sure, and spons or play areas, but only in quancicies and in places where busy new streets and their uses can enforce safety and insure attraction.

The placement of these new streets will be influenced by two principal physical considerations: First, they must tie in with streets beyond the project borders, because the prime object is to knit this site with what lies around it. (An important part of the problem will be the redesign and added uses for the project's side of its border street itself.) Second, the new streers must also tie into the few fixed features within the project site. The apartanent buildings, which we have been thinking of as floating above the site, attached only by elevators and smis, can become street buildings, with their ground foors redesigned and incorporated into streetside uses; or if they are "missed" hy the street, their access points can be gotten to by shore walks or spurs lcading of streets between new street-side buildings. The existing towers, in any case, will now rise here and there above the new streets, the new buildings, the new city which will lie below them.

O tie into the city surrounding, into the immutable fixed sire features, and are at the same time straight, regular grid patterns on the site. As in the case of new stroets cut through other city blocks that are too long, they will likely have bends, jogs and T intersections. So much the better, as I have argued in the previous chapter.

What sorts of new street uses and street buildings are possible? The general aim should be to bring in uses different from residence, because lack of enough mixed uses is precisely one of the causes of deadness, danger and plain inconvenience. These different uses can occupy entire new street-side buildings, or merely the first floors or basements of buildings. Almost any kind of work use would be especially valuable; also evening uses and general commerce, paricularly if these will draw good cross-use from outside the project's former boundaries.

Gerring this diyersiy is more easily said than done, because buildings on new streets on a project site will cariy the serious economic burden of being composed of virtually all new con-, struction, instead of being of mingled ages. This is a truly formidable handicap; there is no way of overcoming it ideally—it is one of the handicaps we inherit in inheriting projecrs. However, there are several ways of min mizing this.

One means, possibly the most promising, is to depend in part upon vendors who use carts and do not require buildings. This is a partial economic substitute for the missing old, low-overhead store space.

Deliberate streer arrangements for vendors can be full of life, aftraction and interest, and because of bargains are excellent lass-Mver, elgh-k. A Philadelphia architect, Robert Geddes, has designed an interesting vendor area for a proposed commercial renewal street in thar city. In the street problem which Geddes had, the vendor area was to be a market plaza, across the street from a small public building; on its side of the street the plaza was enclosed on two sides by the sides of adjoining store and apartnent buildings, but there was nothing enclosing it across the rear (it penetrared only half through its block and abutted parking). Geddes designed, as a backdrop, an attractive but economical shed for garaging the cants after business hours.

A street-side shed for cart garaging could be used along srretches of project streers, just as well as it can be used in a plaza design.

Ourdoor vending would be an excellent eye-catcher for extending across T intersections or streer bends. You will recall that what goes into an eye-catching street site has much to do with giving an impression of character to a whole scene. One of the \_difficult visual problems of project salvage will be to make these places look lively and urban enough; they have so much grimness and visual repetition to overcome.

A  m of too much new construction would depend on the device of guaranteed-rent dwellings. These buildings could be placed on project streets, the same as on any other city streets, as described in Chapter Seventeen. However, they could be specified as row houses, or as double duplexes (one duplex on top of another, making four stories). Just as rows of old city brownstones have proved convertible to many kinds of different city uses and combinations of uses, generally one or two buildings at a time, or even one or two floors at a ime, so would these basically similar small buildings be inherently flexible. They would represent from the beginning, a use-conversion reservoir.

Still another possibility has been worked out by Perkins & Will, Chicago and White Plains archirects, who, as a public service, devi'sed for Union Settlement in New York a number of new ideas in public housing project design. Among the Perkins & Will proposals were four-story flats, placed on stilts to forin an open "basement," with the basement. floor either at ground level or four feet below ground level; one purpose was to make possible cheap enclosure of space for stores or other uses. The halflevel basements made the flats above only a half-story instead of a full story above ground; this arrangement, besides being economical, would make a good street variation, because stores orworkshops in basements, reached by a few steps down from the street, are often popular and attractive.

Still another possibility is to build some of the street-side edifices in cheap and makeshift fashion (which does not necessarily mean they must be ugly), with the intention of making overhead low at the most economically difficult stage, and their replacement practical in future when economic success warrants it. This is not as promising as the other methods, however, because buildings built well enough to stand five years or ten years have to be built well enough to stand a great deal longer. It is hard to give buildings a calculated built-in obsolescence and make really appreciable savings.

All housing projects with all buildings are especially handicapped in supervision of children, and even after salvage work it will still be impossible to supervise children from the high apartments in the way that children on nornal city sidewalks can be supervised from the windows of flats, houses or tenements above. This is one reason it is so imperative to get adults circulating around and spreading themselves through time in all public spaces at ground level, to get small businessmen wirh their typical propensity for public law and order. to get other public characters too, and to have streets snfficiently active and interesting so that they will be watched reasonably well from dwellings in at least the first three or four stories of buildings, the foors from which surveillance counts most.

On  the prot panng lusns as be he ot a -projects can evade the general workings of city land economics. To be sure, by making use of subsidies and of the powers of condemnation, it is possible to evade the financial need for good economic environment for city commerce and other uses. However, it is one thing to get atound a financial problem, and another to evade basic economic functioning. Project sites are of course as dependent as any other fragments of city geography on inrensity of use, and to get it they have to have a good economic environment for it. How good this economic environment can be depends in parr on the new arrangements and new mixtures of uses within former project grounds, and on gradual unslumming and self-diversification in the project population. Bnt it also depends on how well the surrounding territory is generating diversity and cross-use.

If the area as a whole, along with its former projecrs, becomes lively, improving and unslumming, the nonhousing uses on former project grounds should eventually be able to produce a good return. But these grounds have so many handicaps to begin with, and so much needs to be done from scratch, that considerable public money will be needed for salvage: money will be needed for site replanning and designing itself, which will take a heavy investment in time and imagination because this time it cannot be done routinely or by people ignorant of what they are doing and why; money will be needed for construction of streets and other public spaces; and probably money will be needed for subsidy to at least some of the new building construction.

Whether or not the ownership of the already existing dwellings themselves rema'ins with the housing authorities, the new stroets and new uses, including new dwellings mixed with them, cannot be the property and responsibility of these agencies, putting them into a politically impossible (and unwise) competition with private building owners. Nor should housing authorities be given. the responsibility of reweaving their old baronies back into the free city, a responsibility for which they are in no way whatever equipped. This land was taken by govermenml powers for the authorities. It can be mken from them by governmental powers, replanned, and lots for building sold off or rented under long-term leases. Portions, of course, should go under the jurisdiction of appropriate city agencies, such as the depattment of parks and the departinent of streets.

Apart from physical and economic improvements at ground lev such s the suggeted, the salvage o publichousg quires some other changes.

The corridors  theusual highise, low-income housing build ing are like corridors in a bad dream: creepily lit, narrow, smelly, blind. They fee like raps, and they are. So are the elevators that lead to them. These traps are what people mean when they say, time and again, "Where can we go? Not to a project! I have children. I have young daughters."

Much has been written about the fact that children urinate in housing project elevators. It is an obvious problem because it leaves a smell and corrodes the machinery. But this is perhaps the most innocuous misuse of project self-service elevators. More serious is the terror that people can fecl in them, with good reason.

The only solution that I can see to this problem, and to the related corridor problem, is to provide elevator attendants. Nothing else, not guards on the grounds, not doormen, no form of "renant education" can make these buildings tolerably safe or heir people tolerably secure from predators coining both from outside the project and from within.

This too will ake money, but little compared to the tremendous investments thar have to be salvaged-—as much as \$40,000,000 in single projecw. I mention \$40,ooo,oce because that happens to be the public invesunent in Frederick Douglass Houses, a new project on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where there has occurred, along with all the usual rerrors, an elevator crime so appallingly savage that the newspapers have taken notice of it.

In Caracas, Venezuela, where the deposed dictator left a large legacy of similar projects with similar dangers, an experiment in improving elevator and corridor safety is reported to have helped. Women tcnants who can manage full- or part-time jobs are hired as regular elevator attendants from 6:00 A.M. t0 1:00 A.M., when elevator service is discontinued. Carl Feiss, a U. S. planning consultant who has done considerable work in Venezuela tells me that the buildings are safer, and that general communu'cation and social tone have also been somewhat improved because the elevator operatots have become rudimentary public chatacters.

Women tenants as attendants might work well in our projects too during the day, when the principal elevator misuses are extortion and sexual molestation of younger children by older children. I suspect that the night shift, when adult attach, muging and robberies are a greater danger, would require men as attendants. It is also doubtful that the night service cut-off would work for us, first, because too many tenants in these projects have night jobs and, second, because too many arbitrary rules, difterent from those applying to other people, already set the projects apart and feed residents' resentments and bitterness.

Tns, publou po mu pb o ing people by choice when they develop choice (which means they must become gladly attached before they have choice), and for this the kinds of salvage already suggested, outside and inside, are necessary. However, in addition, people must of course be pertnitted to stay by choice, which means that maximum income limits must be abandoned. It is not enough to raise limits; the tie of residency to income ptice tags must be abandoned altogether. So long as it remains, not only will all the most successful or lu erbly ai wy, u l theoh mu p chologically identify themselves with their homes either as transients oras "failures.

Rents should be increased in accord with increased incomes, up to the point where full economic rent is paid, as in the proposed guaranteed-rent system, already explained. This economic rent figure would have to include pro-rated amortization and debt service, to work capital costs back into the rent equarion.

No one, or even two, of the suggestions I have snade will be effective as an all-purpose salvager in irself. All three-grounds reconverted and woven back into surrounding city; safety inside buildings; removal of maximum income limits-are necessary. Naturally, the quickest positive results can be expected in the projects where demoralization and the going-backward process of the perpetual slum have wreaked the least harm.

Middle-income housing projects are not o urgent a salvage prohlem as low-income projecs, but in some ways they are more baffing.

Unlike low-income project tenants, many middle-income project tenants appear to favor sotting themsclves into islands distinctly apart from other people. My impression, which I admit is shaky, is that middle-income projects, as they age, tend to contain a significant (or at least articulate) proportion of people who are fearful of contact outside their class. How mnuch such tendencies are innate to people who have chosen to live in class-segregated and regimented projects, and to what extent these feelings are cultivated and developed by Turf living itself, I do not know, My acquaintances in a number of middle-income projects tell me they have ohserved in their neighbors the growth of hostility to the city outside their project borders as disturbing incidents have occurred in their own elevators and in their own grounds--incidents for which outsiders are invariably blamed, with or without evidence. The growth and harderning of Turf psychology because of real dangers—or the concentration together of appreciable numbers of people already beset with xenophobia, whichever it may be--is a serious problem for big cities.

People who live behind project borders and who feel estranged and deeply unsafe about the city across those borders are not going to be much help in eliminating district border vacuums, or even in permitting replanning aimed at rejoining them with the fabric of a city district.

It may be that districts which contain projects exhibiting advanced xenophobia must simply proceed to improve, as disuricts, in spite of this handicap, as best they can. If the streets ouside such projects can nevertheless be catalyzed into greater safety, diversity and vitality, and increased stability of population, and at rhe same time, within the project borders, the built-in dangers resuling from vacuity are ameliorated in any ways that do prove acceptable to the project residents and to the insurance companies, labor unions, cooperatives and private entrepreneurs who own these places, perhaps in time it will be possible to knit them in with the living city. Cerrainly the hope of doing so grows les and less, the more the district around them is converted into stereotyped and dangerous projects too.

Nonresidential projecws, such as cultural or civic centers, can probably in a few cases employ ground replanning tactics to weave them back into the city fabric. The most promising cases are centers located at the edges of downtowns, with little but the buffers and border vacuums resulting from their own presence between themselves and potentially supplementary high-intensity uses. One side of Pittsburgh's new civic center, at least, might be rewoven into the downtown, from which it is now buffered. Parts of San Francisco's civic center might be rewoven into the city with new streets and new uses added.

The main difculty with civic centers, especially those that contain buildings such as auditoriums and halls, bringing huge concentrations of people for relatively brief times, is to find other prinary uses at least roughly proportionate in the concentrations of people that they can supply at other times of day. There still has to be room, somewhere, for the range and amount of secondary diversity thar these combined intensive uses can support; and of course the problem exists of insuficient older buildings for a good range of secondary diversity. In shoit, the trouble is that many civic and cultural center components make sense only as elements of intensive downtown or central use, and to try to make them serve so, once they have been abstracted into islands, means trying to move the mountain to Mahomet.

A more practical way to approach reintegration in most cases, I think, is to aim at disassembling these centers, over periods of time. Dissassembly can occur as opportunity and expediency permit it. The poinr is to watch for the-opportunities. Such an op. portunity occurred, for example, in Philadelphia, at the time the downtown Broad Street Station and Pennsylvania Railroad track embankment were removed, and the office-transportation-hotel project of Penn Center was planned in their place. ThePhiladelphia Free Library, stuck off on a cultural-center boulevard where it gets shockingly little use, was at this time in need of major rehabilitation. Its officials tried hard and long to persuade the city that, instead of redoing the old build'ing, it would be better to move the library out of the cultural center and into the downtown, as part of the Penn Center plan. Apparently nobody responsible in the city government saw that just this kind of reinfiltration of central cultural facilities into the downtown was necessary—for the downtown and for the vitality of the cultural facilities themselves.

If assembled components of cultural and civic islands are disassembled and leave their islands, one by one, as opportunity affords, entirely different uses can be put in their places—preferably uses that will not only be different rather than similar, but that, in their differences, wifl supplement what remains in the project.

Pe saved itself from piling on another mistake—-because by this time Philadelphia has had enough experience with a cuitural center to be somewhat disenchanted with the supposed vital'izing powers of such a place. When the Academy of Music, which is in the downtown, needed rehabilitation a few years ago, almost nobody took seriously the idea that it should be transplanted to the culture reservation. It was kept where it belongs, downtown. Baltimore, after playing around for years with this plan and that for an abstracted and isolated civic-cultural cenrer, has decided instead to build downtown, where these facilities can count most both as needed primary uses and as londmarks.

This is, of course, the best way to salvage any kind of sorredout project, up to the time it is actually built: Think better of it.
