> 来源：Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Figure 1.1

The nature of contemporary problems.

## “NETWORKED”

The networked nature of today’s problem situations means that they potentially influence each other constantly—as we saw in the first case study, where the rise of the Internet confounded the government’s efforts to reach consensus on the route of the railway line. What other people are doing in seemingly unrelated fields might cause an effect that severely influences your problem field and options for action. Examples abound—and we will see another example of an unexpected stakeholder influencing the issues around social housing later in this chapter.

## “OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED”

All together, these four properties of the new problem situations severely challenge the assumptions behind our conventional ways of solving problems. We will see in chapter 7 that any one of these is already enough to pull the rug out from under most conventional problem-solving strategies, and the case studies above have shown that they can be really disconcerting in combination.

These open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems just do not gel well with the assumptions behind our conventional problem-solving methods, because most of our conventional strategies were conceived to work in a reasonably isolated, static, and hierarchically ordered “miniworld.” When problems appeared, we could isolate them in a separate problem arena, decompose the problem into relative simple subproblems and analyze these, create subsolutions, and then build those subsolutions together into an overall solution that satisfied all concerned. If this strategy of divide-and-solve failed, we could use the alternative strategy of exercising authority to “simplify” the problem area by overruling some parties, and force a solution that satisfied the most powerful player.

But neither of these strategies works for today’s problems. We are living in a state of hyperconnectivity. Each of us has become newly connected to innumerable other people. By networking our society, we have inadvertently networked our problems, too—we have made them more open, complex, and dynamic! The enclosed miniworlds of our societies, economies, and cultures have been replaced by a tangle of relationships within complex and overlapping networks, where problems cannot be simplified by being split up (the network of relationships is too strong) and power doesn’t rest in one place anymore (so overrule-and-conquer is out of the question). Moreover, problems are so intimately related to each other (and there are so many interdependencies) that they become impossible to isolate (Stacey, Griffin, and Shaw 2006; Lawson 2001). Solving problems nowadays is like trying to undo the Gordian knot in Greek mythology: whatever string you try to pull to unravel the knot, you end up in more of a jumble.

From the three case histories above, we can also learn that these peculiar open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems cannot be pinned down very easily—if at all. They are more like “problem situations” in which the issues keep shifting around, and any premature attempt to draft a problem definition can lead to suboptimal or even counterproductive solutions. Yet in conventional problem-solving, the “definition of the problem” is always the first step, and it is the solid ground on which the problem-solving practices of organizations are built. Often, organizations that do not realize the open, complex, dynamic, and networked nature of the world around them get tricked into using their established routines because the problem, as they define it for themselves, mostly looks the same as earlier problems. And indeed, the core problems themselves may not have changed much over time (after all, we have planned train lines for over 150 years; we should know how to do this)—but the problem boundaries are harder to draw, and there is a much more complex and dynamic context around the problems we are facing today. That context ultimately defines what practices will work, and which will fail.

Even organizations that fully realize the fluid nature of the world around them often feel they cannot move forward without first defining the problem. But by defining the problem, they inadvertently freeze the context too, and more often than not this is a grave mistake that will come back to haunt them as they try to implement their new solution. One of the core lessons that we will draw from the expert designers’ practices that will be introduced in the next chapters is that new approaches can be developed to deal with open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations without prematurely fixing the problem formulation.

But before we start prescribing a “cure” that will help organizations deal with problem-solving in a different way, we first need to explore what lies behind their current conventional problem-solving practices. And we need to ask ourselves what makes these practices so resistant to change, even in the face of overwhelming evidence that they do not deliver the expected results anymore. To put it in terms of medical diagnostics, we need to get beyond the symptoms of these problem-solving breakdowns, and examine the syndromes that are at the root of it all. The examples described above illustrate a variety of degrees and kinds of “stuckness” that organizations (whether public-sector organizations or commercial companies) experience these days. Let’s explore the underlying syndromes that all have in common (see figure 1.2).

## “THE LONE WARRIOR”

First of all, we can observe that in all these cases the problem-solving situation was set in such a way that one major party rightly or wrongly felt that they “owned” the problem and needed to drive the problem-solving process, and they honestly believed this approach to be in everyone’s best interest. In cases like these, one party seeks total control over the problem-solving process, and usually positions itself outside the problem-solving arena (everything else needs to change, but never them). While that may be a good and efficient way to work in conventional problem situations, we can see that in situations like the high-speed train problem, where other stakeholders seek to influence the solution, conflicts arise immediately. There has been no process to create a basis of trust and understanding between the lead organization and these

# LONE WARRIORFREEZE THE WORLDSELF-MADE BOXRATIONAL HIGH GROUNDIDENTIFICATION

Figure 1.2 The five syndromes of conventional organizations.

interested parties to enable a genuine, effective collaboration to occur. And it is very hard for organizations to understand their own role in creating the disconnect, let alone to change their singular approach into a more collaborative one once the project is under way. Once the process has started off on the wrong foot, it is very hard to change. In the commercial world, projects that have started without an open engagement with the people they are setting out to create value for are very hard to redirect (Harkema 2012). In public-sector consultation processes, parties often dig in after an initial skirmish, and at that point the whole process shifts from dealing with the problem to discussions that focus only on “position bargaining.” In all the open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations above, the problem-solving situation can move forward only through collaboration.

The pattern that emerges is that the lead party who had heroically shouldered too much of the problem-solving responsibility is just one step away from deep frustration. This party will see the involvement of others as “interference,” and feel misunderstood and unappreciated in their implacable motivation. These are strong sentiments that easily turn into anger, and often cause them to stop listening to others altogether.

## “FREEZE THE WORLD”

Conventional problem-solving processes tend to be curiously static. Apparently, conventional problem-solving requires us to stop the world, isolate the problem, and come up with a one-off solution. But in an environment that is very dynamic and open, this approach just isn’t realistic: the influence of time and connectedness means that the borders around the problem situation are very permeable, and that the rules of the game keep changing over time. The presence of such a “freeze the world” practice is indicated by telltale signs like endless amounts of preliminary research and interminable working group discussions before a project is allowed to start. The problem solver tries to carefully understand the problem situation before deciding on an elegant and convincing solution. This approach is curiously nonexperimental, and underlying it is the apparent need to attain complete closure before the solution is put into action. When the problem solvers realize they have failed to contain the problem-solving situation and are swept along in a dynamic process, or “thrown” into situations (Winograd and Flores 1986, quoting Heidegger) that are not of their making, they feel they are losing control. Forced to improvise when they are unwilling or ill-equipped to do so, they might just stop in their tracks. This is called the “freeze the world” syndrome.

## “THE SELF-MADE BOX”

All organizations will initially try to approach a new problem in ways that have worked in the past. This reaction is completely understandable—it is prudent to avoid the investment and hassle that always accompanies change unless it is really necessary. Even organizations that pride themselves on being innovators in their field aim to be just ahead of the others, and avoid unwarranted innovation. But in these case studies, we have seen that there is a great reluctance to change tack even when these trusted practices are clearly not delivering the desired results. The organizations seem to be trapped by their habits.

In a worst-case scenario, the organization might be holding on to its conventional practices for dear life, often not even knowing why. This grasping is accompanied by a degree of defeatism or melancholia, a nostalgia for the times when the world was still understandable, a golden age that is now long gone.

This pattern of behavior, effectively the locking down of a problem situation, leads to a deeply engrained inability of organizations to step beyond the boundaries of their earlier ways of thinking. Creativity consultants then provide workshops to help people “think outside the box”—which may help a little, but organizations often do not realize what a real change in their own practice will mean, and do not realize that the boxes they are trying to escape from are completely self-made. Later in this book we will see how design practitioners manage to escape creating these thought traps for themselves. The “self-made box” is an important syndrome because in a truly bound situation, even very mild and reasonable people can be strangely persistent, relentlessly pushing a certain problem-solving approach for lack of alternatives. They are blocking new thinking and reinforcing the patterns of the “self-made box.”

## “TAKING THE RATIONAL HIGH GROUND”

Deep down, all organizations that display clear signs of these first three syndromes are convinced that their way of dealing with the problem situation is completely rational, and that they couldn’t have done anything else. This belief in their own rationality, and the deeply rooted conviction that there is only one rational position, can make organizations strangely inflexible in their problem-solving approach. This inflexibility persists even to the point of inducing a curious repetitiveness, where we see an organization using the same disastrous approach over and over again. The same government that planned the highspeed train link also constructed a major freight line running right through the country a couple of years later. That project displayed exactly the same dysfunctional pattern as the one before (de Vries and Bordewijk 2009). The strong pattern that emerges here goes beyond clinging to cherished assumptions or preconceptions: at its core is the conviction that the organization’s problem-solving actions are completely rational and deeply self-evident. This is reminiscent of the way generals in the First World War kept ordering waves of attacks on the enemy trenches—only to have their troops mowed down time and again. Even when this sometimes happened several times a day, they persisted because they just had no other strategy to break the stalemate. Thus there is a strange correlation between the unquestioning belief in a certain type of rationality and the utter madness of continuing to apply it in situations where it clearly doesn’t work.

Symptomatic behavior that accompanies this syndrome can be the repetitious use of sentences that start with “Of course … ,” exemplifying the inability to discuss other viewpoints. Such appeals to rationality and causation come with a second claim, and that is to the moral high ground of “reasonableness.” This can easily result in the adoption of a nonnegotiable position in the problem-solving process and in stubborn perseverance. Attachment to the rational high ground is accompanied by an acute fear of what might lie beyond the confines of this rationality, which is often referred to in terms of anarchy and chaos. Many organizations hold on to the “rational high ground” for dear life, to avoid slipping into the quicksand where “trial and error” may be the only way forward.

## “SHAPE YOUR IDENTITY AROUND ESTABLISHED PRACTICES”

Well-worn problem-solving paths become deeply entrenched in the minds of people, and indeed in the structure and procedures of an organization. They easily become a major part of what people feel is the organization’s core, its identity and “culture.” This culture is embodied in the organization’s goals, structures, processes, espoused values, practices, and the accepted definition of “quality” within the organization. If the organization operates in a stable environment and has the time to hone its procedures to perfection, and its culture is seen to be very successful, the emotional bond of people with what they see as the unchangeable DNA of the organization can become very strong.

Persistence in holding on to an organization’s practices can be seen most clearly and explicitly in what is called organizational autopoiesis, the subtle ways in which new staff members are initiated into “how we do things here” by the resident staff. Initiation starts as soon as the new person arrives (which incidentally can be frustrating to the management if they had tried to bring fresh ideas and new practices into the organization by hiring this person). This pathological identification with current practice has been described as an organization’s culture becoming “self-sealing” (Argyris 2000), and it is the absolute death knell to any innovation. A self-sealed culture makes it extremely difficult for the staff to even think of new practices, no matter how strongly and obviously they are needed to meet changes in the external environment.

## MOVING FORWARD

As Boutellier remarks (2013), complexity without direction paralyzes.

The feeling of powerlessness that permeates the case studies can be traced back to these five underlying syndromes, which will each be further explored throughout the book. But before we go on, it is important to realize that the proponents of the nineteen case studies in this book are actually all very good organizations, which have operated successfully in their respective domains for many years. The people in these organizations are highly educated, highly skilled, well-meaning, experienced, motivated, clever, and proactive. The fact that such impressive organizations find themselves staring at these new types of problems in a dumbfounded manner is what sparked the writing of this book.

And we have to realize that shifting these old ways of problem-solving is not going to be easy. The five syndromes that prevent us from addressing these open, complex, dynamic, and networked problem situations in novel ways are literally as old as humanity. This is why they are so recognizable—they are deeply rooted in us, and in our professional cultures. In fact, these patterns of thought can be chased all the way back to the big books of humanity. “Lone warriors” already populated the Bible, the Koran, and the Bhagavad-Gita. Even though the lone warrior pattern with all its heroism and dysfunctional romanticism was brilliantly mocked by Cervantes in his Don Quixote, the long line of archetypal lone warriors has continued, extending unabated to today’s children’s books and Hollywood blockbusters. Likewise, the idea that a “frozen world” is necessary to solve any problem is another assumption that permeates our stories, films, and literature—think about crime stories, for instance. The Sherlock Holmeses always discover the perpetrator from a select group of suspects that is isolated in a house, on a train, in a specific family constellation, or (nowadays) in a spaceship. The “self-made box” of received wisdom and conventional practices is often considered the very core of the culture of our societies, and eagerly reinforced by popular media. The “rational high ground” that is often implied in this claim to authority sparks another archetype: the clever outsider who runs circles around accepted behavior. These jester-like figures are consistent across time and cultures: examples range from Loki in Celtic mythology to the Tengu in Japan, and the stand-up comedian of today. But this carnival of ritualized dissent implicitly recognizes the importance of the consensus and the powers that be (Le Roy Ladurie 1979). The dark logic behind the state apparatus in Orwell’s 1984 offers us a dystopic view of what the enforcement of a limited, twisted rationality can lead to. But that book becomes really chilling when the reader realizes that the logic is completely sealed within the “identity” of the society, and everybody in it. There is no escape possible from this closed totalitarian culture, and all deeds of resistance will ultimately be doomed. The self-sealing mechanism is very serious, indeed …

Thus, there is no question that the syndromes we are dealing with here are deeply engrained, because they serve important purposes in creating stability and continuity. They cannot be “solved” or eliminated—but we will see later in this book that they can be overcome when that is needed.

Frame creation is an opportunity to approach the problems we face in novel ways, and avoid repeating the dysfunctional problem-solving practices of the past. As a first example, in the next case study the complex and deeply engrained problems of a social housing situation are approached in an original and very effective manner, bypassing all conventional problem-solving strategies.

## CASE 4
