> 来源：Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Design is not just about creating beauty

In many design professions, a pleasing visual aesthetic is important but is just one factor among many that need to be taken into account in the creation of the design. In my own field of product design, designers are torn between the requirement to create a product that is technically viable and ergonomically sound and displays marketable value and the need to make it visually attractive. The idea that design should always be about the creation of something beautiful has deep historical roots: the very first professional “industrial designers” were needed because the first manufactured homewares produced during the industrial revolution were often overdecorated monstrosities (Heskett 1985). Until that time, before the advent of mass production, middle-class culture had been restrained in its tastes by the costs of craftsmanship. Ornaments were expensive, and thus were a status symbol owned by the few. But manufacturing suddenly made ornamentation very cheap, releasing a veritable flood of curls and patterns on every available surface. Manufacturers kept heaping it on, believing the more, the better. The 1853 world’s fair in London (held in the spectacularly modern Crystal Palace) was the first venue that brought these fruits of industry together, and the result was shocking to the beholder. The criticism in the world press was appropriately scathing. The exhibition served as a wake-up call for the need of a new aesthetic for industrial products, and spawned the profession of industrial design. Despite all the years of evolution away from these early form-focused beginnings, the image of beautification still accompanies the popular notion of design. As Foucault (2002) has shown, although ideas might follow one another in quick succession, the underlying “discourse” in society changes only very gradually. He was talking about mental health, but he could have taken design as an example.
