> 来源：Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst)\Frame Innovation Create New Thinking by Design (Kees Dorst).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Figure 7.3

Aspects of novelty in relation to organizations.

aspect of creativity as embodied in techniques like brainstorming, using “creative sessions” to create a wide spread of associations and ideas to be clustered and evaluated. This approach is in marked contrast to the problem-oriented, explorative, targeted creativity that can be observed in expert designers and that has become one of the principles of frame creation.

## SOURCES OF NOVELTY

One of the key paradoxes underlying innovation management thinking is the problem of judging novelty when the criteria by which we judge are still set according to the original framing of the problem. Frame creation sidesteps this paradox by focusing on a reconsideration of the original problem situation before generating solutions. In innovation management, sources of novel solutions are typically sought through methods like the SWOT analysis (in a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis, the internal strengths and weaknesses of an organization are compared to the external opportunities and threats to determine what would be fruitful future directions for the organization). Such a SWOT analysis maps the organization and its context—thus, the novelty might be limited by the organization as is and its original view of the relevant context. And, from a frame creation perspective, we would argue that the words used to describe these strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats are part of specific frames, which need to be examined before such an analysis can be done. Otherwise, the use of these words could limit the scope of the analysis in unforeseen ways. In frame creation, the source of novelty lies in the exploration of a broader field and the emergence of themes.

## THE PLACE OF NOVELTY IN ORGANIZATIONS

As described above, innovation management tends to nurture and protect the innovative capacity in an organization by placing it in relative isolation from other organizational processes. In frame creation, novelty comes from themes that are universal by their very nature and may exist throughout an organization, in distributed actor networks. Because it relegates creativity to specific brief phases in the larger innovation process, innovation management does not address the fundamental paradox between stability and change. It sidesteps this paradox in the time (process) dimension by creating a special isolated “creative phase,” or in the organizational dimension by relegating the responsibility for novelty to a “product champion” who has to carry the new idea through to completion, while withstanding all attacks from within the innovation-adverse organization. Sometimes the sidestepping also has a physical nature, as when organizations create “skunk works”: offsite innovation initiatives where the normal rules of the organization do not apply.

## OPEN, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC, AND NETWORKED PROBLEMS

The open, complex, dynamic, and networked problems and the organizational syndromes that they highlight have been addressed by innovation management literature in various ways, as exemplified by the models and methods of multidisciplinary innovation and open innovation. With the introduction of the frame creation approach, this book has offered an alternative way of dealing with these problems, through the adoption of a set of strong and coherent design practices. Frame creation imports a set of sophisticated practices from a discipline that has been versed in the creation of new solutions. In comparison, some innovation management methods seem to be reactive to the syndromes in the life of our organizations, compensating (and often overcompensating) for a perceived problem: for example, they propose that companies are too closed in their outlook, and need to think about “open innovation” (which runs the risk of opening the doors much too widely, leading straight to chaos).

## THE CONTEXT

For dealing with the dynamic nature of the context, innovation management proposes sophisticated methods for tracking and analyzing change (market research, trend watching, forecasting, scenario methods, etc.). One of the key features of frame creation is that it seeks to look beyond the restless changes of the day and base its new approaches on the universality and stability of the themes. Both are needed, in the end: this is surely a point where innovation management and frame innovation can complement each other.

## DEFINITION OF SUCCESS

The definition of success in innovation management tends to be taken from the general management literature, where short-term pressures (return on investment, or ROI, and shareholder value) often prevail. Frame creation is quite radical in that it takes a long-term perspective. Although that could be perceived as a weakness of the frame creation approach in this fast-moving and restless world, it may actually be a much closer reflection of good management practice in the real world. In a delightful study, Hart (1996) has shown that the prevalent measure of “success” that is used in marketing to select “best practices” to study and emulate does not correspond with what managers in the field consider “successful” projects. The marketing measure of success is based on financial criteria like return on investment, while the managers were much more interested in projects that maybe had not been so profitable but had provided a learning experience on which future financial success could be built. They were not very interested in the high-yielding “cash cow” projects that the management scientists had considered to be best practices and encouraged us to emulate.

## RISK

Innovation management doesn’t shy away from the risk that is part and parcel of innovation, and celebrates the abilities and personal attributes of innovation leaders who take risks. Perhaps the high mortality rate among innovative projects gives rise to a culture of admiring these “project champions” and celebrating the innovator who perseveres against all odds—and other such highly charged battle metaphors. In contrast, frame creation is decidedly undramatic: the risk that is inherent in the creation of newness is reduced enormously by the careful analysis and the creative exploration that make up the frame creation process. Yet most of the cases described in this book have been seen as both radical and successful projects by the partner organizations. On reflection, one could posit that the restless jumping toward ideas that is seen as inevitable in most innovation management literature is what introduces risk into the innovation process—a risk that is then accepted as part of the heroics of innovation leadership. It is worth considering whether some of this risk may be self-inflicted and unnecessary. If I owned shares in a company, I would be more comfortable with a firm that uses the frame creation approach to achieving radical innovation than with a firm that exposes itself to unnecessary risks.

## INNOVATION LEADERSHIP

This raises interesting questions on the “culture” of the fields of innovation management and frame creation. We know that professional cultures are closely related to the way we solve problems in our social group (“community of practice”). Whereas innovation management, which has its roots in U.S. business schools, stresses radical innovation, risk, and leadership, (often expressed in terms of military metaphors), frame creation is more deliberate, a trait that might betray its origin in mainland Europe. The depth of the frame creation approach cuts out risk while still achieving radical innovation—but by eliminating risk, it also rules out the opportunity to be a hero in the classic sense of the word. Frame creation might be more amenable to, say, the Indian or Chinese approaches to issues—see appendix 4. These cultural factors might also explain why, while the model is very widely applicable, frame creation has found its first experimental platforms in the public sector. Private-sector companies have been slower in realizing its potential and embracing the possibilities of frame creation. One could speculate that this is because the culture behind the frame creation approach doesn’t come naturally to them, and they do not have the processes and structures in their organizations to deal with this type of innovation. But examples like the department store case study (case 12) have shown that the depth of the frame creation approach is not wasted on the commercial sector.

## ENTREPRENEURING

A clear contact point between the frame creation approach and the thinking in the broader field of management and organizational sciences lies in the area of entrepreneuring. This field has lately become more dynamic in its approach as it has turned away from studying the personality traits of great entrepreneurs (and glorifying these innovation leaders as “lone warriors”) to concentrate on the study of processes. Hence the word “entrepreneuring,” rather than “entrepreneurship” (Steyaert 2007). With this shift in focus, the debate has moved away from discussions of nature versus nurture (can entrepreneurship be taught, or is it an innate personality trait?) and toward the fruitful bringing together of many theories and viewpoints on the practices of these entrepreneurs. A new richness in the field has resulted. The theory of effectuation is an attempt to come up with such a central model; it finds its roots in the same logical schemas that were used in chapter 3 to position design reasoning relative to the other reasoning modes. In “effectuation,” the central reasoning mode of entrepreneurial thinking is characterized as an “even if …” reasoning pattern that deals first and foremost with issues of possibility and risk (Sarasvathy 2008). This theoretical basis is now matched to real-world entrepreneurial practices by studying entrepreneurial people. These studies are performed in much the same way that designers have been studied, using protocol analysis of individuals and groups in laboratory and real-life situations (see appendix 1 for an example). The patterns of thinking found are interestingly similar too. As it is, the lessons learned from these rich data sets are restricted by the adherence of the entrepreneuring scholars to Herbert Simon’s theories— entrepreneurial activity is thus seen through the rather limiting lens of rational problem-solving. Notions like interpretation and framing do not come into this yet, but given the direction we have taken in this book, one can easily see where connections can be made. Frame innovation is a key entrepreneurial activity.

To conclude, there is much that can be learned from innovation management, and the field has contributed enormously to the innovative capacity of organizations. It has flagged many problems that are very real in practice, reflected upon them, and proposed avenues of solution that are very relevant. It has also provided a context for innovation in organizations. However, in its modeling of innovation, the field of innovation management has adapted to the “manufacturing” type of organization as it has developed in the industrial economy (Smulders 2006), and many of the critical remarks above stem from the difficulties that arise from the compromises that accompany this adaptation. Frame creation is, in a sense, more radical in that it steps away from that image of an organization and takes its inspiration from the knowledge economy. But this means that frame creation often doesn’t fit easily in the existing processes of organizations that are structured along the principles of the industrial economy. While this is a deep and fundamental difference that as such cannot be resolved, some key frame creation tools and practices have been developed to traverse this terrain. They will be introduced in the next chapter.

# 8 THE ART OF FRAME INNOVATION

## MAKING IT HAPPEN

Frame creation is a situated process that requires new thinking every time. So there will never be a “recipe,” a set of actions that can be followed more or less thoughtlessly, by anyone, at any moment, and that will lead to good results (Suchman 1987). This book therefore seeks to deliver the next best thing: a keen understanding of the principles and practices of frame creation that will help the practitioner to be thoughtful and flexible in achieving radical innovation. If anything, this book is a do-it-yourself manual rather than a how-to guide. This final chapter will look at some of the key lessons learned over the years of applying frame creation in various contexts, and will support readers with practical advice to take away on their path to integrating frame creation practices in their ways of working, and becoming frame innovators in their own right. But first, let’s bring back the practice perspective through an extensive case study, described in terms of the nine-step frame creation model. Critical moments in this process will be used to illustrate the advice, tools, and methods that follow.

## CASE 19
