> 来源：The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## CHAPTER 3

## The most cherished objects in the home

Empirical events gain meaning only when they are interpreted through a conceptual framework. This is why in the preceding chapters we have outlined a theoretical perspective from which to view transactions between people and things. It is also true, however, that theories are directed and corrected  in fact, cultivated by systematic exposure to facts. Therefore in the next four chapters we shall alternate development of the theory with presentation of the findings of an empirical study, highlighting first one, then the other aspect of the investigation. What follows, therefore, is neither a purely theoretical analysis nor the outline of a factual report; instead, it is a combination of both  an exploratory effort  in which insights are gleaned from data and new empirical analyses are presented to bolster emerging hypotheses. Hence, the conclusions will often remain heuristic rather than definitive. On the other hand, the flexibility of such a method will provide us with a greater variety of leads than could a more conventional one.

To find out what the empirical relationships between people and things in contemporary urban America are, in 1977 we interviewed members of 82 families living in the Chicago Metropolitan Area. Twenty of these families lived in Rogers Park, a relatively stable community at the northern limits of the city of Chicago; the remaining were selected from the adjacent suburb of Evanston, an old and diversified city in its own right, even though it is geographically indistinguishable from Chicago. Half the families belonged to the upper-middle class, half were lower-middle class as measured by Hollingshead's occupational ratings and by level of education. In each family we talked to at least one of the children, both parents, and at least one grandparent, who often lived at a different address from the younger generations. There were 79 respondents in the youngest generation, 150 in the middle one, and 86 in the oldest generation, for a total of 315 respondents. Forty-four percent of the respondents were males. The Evanston sample was selected by street canvassing of census tracts chosen to give a stratified socioeconomic representation ranging from the poorest to the wealthiest neighborhoods in the community. The Rogers Park sample was drawn by random telephone sampling. Of the total group, 67 percent were Caucasian, 30 percent Afro-American, and 3 percent Oriental. Fifty percent of the lower SES (socioeconomic status) respondents were Caucasian, 50 percent Afro-American; the respective proportions for the upper SES groups were 87 and 13 percent. The first criterion in selecting the sample was to find families with three generations that could be interviewed, so that families with one generation living farther than one hour driving distance, or with children under 10 years of age, were excluded. (For a more detailed description of the sample and the sampling method see Appendix A.)

Each respondent was interviewed in his or her home. The interview began with a number of questions directed at the respondent's relationship to the neighborhood, community, and the city; these issues, however, will not be dealt with here. (For a sample of the full interview schedule see Appendix B.) We then asked for a description of the home itself  its atmosphere, its mood, its outstanding physical characteristics. Next, we inquired about the objects it contained: "What are the things in your home which are special to you?"

After the respondent identified the special objects, the interviewer probed to ascertain why the object was special, what it would mean to the respondent to be without it, where it was kept, how and when it was acquired, and so forth. All responses were tape recorded and later transcribed verbatim. The word "special" was used by the interviewer throughout the interview to mean significant, meaningful, highly valued, useful, and so on. It is less precise than these other words and thus imposes on the respondent the task of defining what constitutes the meaning of an object.

A total of 1,694 things were mentioned by the people with whom we talked; on the average, this comes to slightly more than five objects for each respondent. By examining the kinds of objects mentioned as being special, we were hoping to make a first step toward understanding how people relate to the world of artifacts around them. But clearly, it was impossible to tackle all 1,694 objects one by one. Thus we attempted to develop an empirical typology or "grammar" by sorting these things into as many distinct categories as would preserve the commonsense, or "emic," characteristic of the objects. It was found that 41 categories accounted for all the objects mentioned and that each thing could be classified in one of them with at least a 95 percent accuracy. Some of these categories were much more inclusive than others: Furniture, for example, included chairs, tables, chests, sofas, and dining-room sets; TV, on the other hand, included only television sets. (See Appendix C for a description of object categories.)

A similar process of classification was used to organize the reasons given why the objects were special. A total of 37 meaning categories were constructed, such as "Memento," "Souvenir," "Gift," or "Enjoyment," depending on whether the respondent stressed general memories or the memory of a place, the fact that the object was a gift or provided enjoyment as the reasons for cherishing the object. Because possessions actually exist in a context for the person and have multiple meanings, any one object may appear in more than one of these categories. The categories do not exhaust the range of meanings or capture the personal significance of objects for individual respondents, but they serve to uncover generally shared patterns of meaning. By using these criteria, we coded 7,875 different reasons that the objects were special; in other words, on the average, each object was coded as having four separate meanings. Interrater reliability in coding these meanings was less than for object categories but was still respectable: The agreement between two coders was approximately 85 percent for all generations. In most of the following analyses, instead of the 37 meaning categories, we shall use 11 meaning classes that resulted from combining similar categories. For instance, the categories "memento," "recollection," "heirloom," and "souvenir" were all combined in the class "Memories." (See Appendix C for a list of the meaning categories and classes.)

With these preliminaries out of the way, we can now turn to our first question: What sorts of objects are significant in the lives of contemporary Americans? Table 3.1 lists the ten categories of objects that were mentioned the most by people. Taken together, they add up to about half of all the objects; the remaining 31 categories account for the other half.

Table 3.1. Percentage of total sample mentioning at least one special object in each category (N = 315)
<table><tr><td>Objects</td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>1. Furniture</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>2. Visual art</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>3. Photographs</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>4. Books</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>5. Stereo</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>6. Musical instruments</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>7. TV</td><td>21</td></tr><tr><td>8. Sculpture</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>9. Plants</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>10. Plates</td><td>15</td></tr></table>

These categories, then, are symptomatic of what kinds of things people cherish in their homes. By looking more closely at these ten kinds of objects, we should be able to understand better the ties that bind people to the material world around them and the consequences of this relationship. Logically, we begin with the largest and most frequently mentioned category.

## Furniture

Not surprisingly, chairs, sofas and tables are most often mentioned as being special objects in the home (beds were classified in a separate category). After all, furniture is important in the home, it is the sine qua non without which the house would be naked and one would be ashamed to have visitors. One could say that furniture is special because it makes life at home comfortable, but then one immediately thinks of a Japanese or Hindu home, which is practically devoid of furniture but equally comfortable to its inhabitants. Clearly, the notion that chairs and tables are more comfortable in an absolute sense is not true; they are so only within a pattern of cultural habits and expectations.

Furniture presupposes a settled life-style and surplus exchange power, which can be invested in these symbols of stability. Perhaps it is only after the great silent bourgeois revolution of the late Middle Ages that furniture became a central domestic symbol, a test for the family's settledness and affluence. From the early dynasties of Egypt through the Renaissance, few homes contained any furniture.

Throughout those forty centuries, the poor and the vast slave population had few possessions; but although the rich were incomparably better off, no Pharaoh's palace or luxurious Roman town or country house approached the standards of comfort and convenience, or commanded the variety of furnishing enjoyed by the tenants of a modern house in a municipal housing estate. (Gloag, 1966, p. 63)

Rich farmhouses in rural France prior to the Renaissance were almost devoid of furniture; people sat, and even slept, on sacks of grain or mounds of straw. Plates, silverware, clothing and any other kind of movable property was also exceedingly rare (Le Roy Ladurie, 1979). In the Middle Ages,

even wealthy citizens owned little besides a trestle table, with boards that could stand in a corner or against the wall except at meal times, a few benches and three-legged stools, for chairs were a rarity, and in the richest house there was seldom more than one, which was used exclusively by the master of the household. (Gloag, 1966, p. 75)

Initially, the possession of furniture was a clear sign of authority: In Ottoman Moslem culture until quite recently a couch (or divan) was still a symbol of the ruler and his court; it was on such a couch that the pasha or Raja conferred with his counselors, hence the name of Divan given to the supreme council and its "prime minister." In most cultures a throne has been the symbol of highest authority, and we still defer to the chairperson at a meeting.

Thus it seems that in the evolution of cultural life forms the personal ownership of furniture is a relatively recent step, one that confers authority and power to its owner. As with any other man-made object, furniture is the product of psychic activity. It takes the concentrated attention of many people to acquire the raw material and the intention to fashion it in a shape that conforms to the human body and its actions. Therefore to own furniture, again like owning other objects, means to possess other people's psychic activity. The preeminent place of furniture over other objects might be due to the fact that it can be displayed more easily, that it is supposed to be useful, and that it constitutes relatively heavy investments of money, and hence of psychic energy.

Let us now turn to the respondents' comments on why they cherish the pieces of furniture they mentioned. In reading their answers, one obviously cannot immediately arrive at a facile generalization. The reasons people give are many and diverse and cannot be reduced to a simple set. But there are trends that can help us to sort out the multiplicity of meanings that such things evoke among people.

Some of these trends are characteristic of younger people as opposed to older ones, others are more prevalent among males than among females; however, they also cut across these larger categories to produce clusters of meaning that are characteristic of people in general. Here is what a teenage boy says about why he selected the kitchen table and chairs as being special to him:

'Cause I can sit on 'em, eat on 'em, play on 'em, do lots of things with the chairs and table. (What would it mean to you not to have these things?) It would mean that I wouldn't have as much comfort because those chairs are very comfortable. And with another table, I couldn't play as good 'cause I love the feel of that table.

This short answer illustrates several trends in the answers of the younger generation. The meaning of kitchen furniture for this youngster revolves about the active experiences he can have by interacting with the thing; the accent is on the utilitarian, enjoyable characteristics of the objects, and the outcome refers exclusively to the respondent's own personal self. The table does not provide a link with others or with some ideal to be achieved; it only serves the momentary purposes of the user.

Among women of the middle generation, the reasons for cherishing furniture are very different. The following is an example of why one middle-aged woman finds two upholstered chairs in the living room special:

They are the first two chairs me and my husband ever bought, and we sit in them and I just associate them with my home and having babies and sitting in the chairs with babies.

Another respondent comments on why a wicker arm chair in the living room is special to her:

It is very old. It was given to me as a present by one of the oldest black families in Evanston. They thought I would take care of it. My brother brought it home. It belonged to some very special people, and it has been in the family for years.

Both these quotes illustrate quite a different set of meanings from the ones typically mentioned by younger respondents. Gone is the emphasis on comfort and enjoyment; one finds, instead, important memories, relationships, and past experiences. The egocentric attitude is replaced by a concern for other people: one's family or wider ethnic connections. There is an implicit sense of responsibility for maintaining a network of social ties. In general, these themes are quite typical of the women in the sample.

The same themes also appear in the answers of their husbands. In addition, the men often look at their furniture as the embodiment of a personal accomplishment, or an ideal they strive to achieve. Here is what one man says about a desk in the study:

In contrast to the other answers reviewed thus far, this one introduces a direct note of accomplishment, of the object embodying an abstract ideal (simplicity, economy) as opposed to personal enjoyment or social relationships. Of course, as said earlier, these "themes" are not exclusive to teenagers or to grown men and women. Every category of respondents might mention any of the reasons for cherishing an object. Yet some types of reasons are more typical of some classes of respondents than of others, and this is why we use quotations from children stressing enjoyment and egocentricity, from adult women stressing social networks, and from men stressing accomplishment and abstract ideals. Later we shall examine in more detail the relationship among objects, reasons, and types of respondents. At this point let us turn to the significance of furniture in the lives of older respondents.

Generally, when grandparents mention furniture they say it is special to them for reasons similar to those that adult women, the mothers in our sample, also stress: The objects are signs of past events, of ties to family and to other people. In addition, there is also a strong concern about the object becoming a link with the younger generations; a sign representing the owner to be passed on into the future:

(This chest) was bought by my mother and father when they were married, about 70 years ago. And they didn't buy it rew, so it's practically an antique. My mother painted it different colors, used it in the bedroom. When I got it my husband sanded it down to the natural wood. It's beautiful. I wouldn't part with it for anything. And I imagine the kids are going to want it, my daughter-in-law loves antiques.

It is interesting in this case that the respondent thought it noteworthy to mention the transformations brought to the chest: Her mother painted it, her husband sanded it. These actions change the appearance of the thing while preserving its identity; they appropriate the object at different stages of its relationships by stamping the identity of the owner on its appearance. Painting and sanding are almost rituals of passage in a relationship with the object spanning two generations. In addition to the concern for continuity of relationships in the past and in the future, the oldest generation, like the youngest, often stresses the theme of comfort and personal usefulness that a favorite piece of furniture provides.

There was a total of 638 meanings given for why furniture was considered special. Of these, the largest classes referred to Memories (15 percent), Stylistic reasons (12 percent), and Experiences (11 percent). Only 5 percent of the meanings were Utilitarian, that is, focused on the usefulness of the object. The importance of the relationship between the self and the object was stressed in 17 percent of the cases; 15 percent of the time, people stressed the relationship between the object and the respondent's immediate family. Other kin and nonfamily ties were mentioned, each only about 3 percent of the time.

In the range of its significance, Furniture is quite typical of the other object categories. They tend to be considered special for a limited range of reasons: because they embody memories and experiences; because they are signs of the self and of one's family. These themes will be developed later on; we shall now look more closely at the kind of objects that, next to furniture, were cherished by the greatest number of people.

## Visual art

The large proportion of people mentioning visual art (26 percent), and the great number of such objects (136, or 8 percent of the total) is due in part to our broad definition of what is qualified for inclusion in this category. An object did not have to be the original work of an artist, or a bona fide recognized work of art. Any two-dimensional representation other than a photograph was included, ranging from an original Picasso to the cheapest reproduction of the Last Supper  provided, of course, that the respondent mentioned the picture as being special. In addition, paintings made by children or other family members were also included in this category. Adopting such a democratic attitude toward what constitutes art was necessary, otherwise, there would be a variety of impossible decisions about where to draw the line on legitimate art.

Previously, we had seen that furniture is a recent candidate for the central position it now holds as a significant household object. The same is even truer for objects in the Visual Art category. The practice of using two-dimensional representations to decorate Western homes, thereby expressing meanings relevant to its inhabitants, is also an outcome of the middle-class mercantile revolution of the Renaissance (Hauser, 1951). Earlier, with some exceptions, only the rulers or the clergy owned pictures. Great areas of the world, particularly those under Islamic influence, have never adopted this practice and, indeed, sometimes have had religious sanctions against it.

This does not mean, of course, that in earlier times and in different cultures homes were bereft of visual beauty; in fact, quite the contrary. In practically every primitive society the decoration of the home reflects the highest skills and aesthetic sensitivity possessed by the culture. The carvings on the beams of a Polynesian hut, the paintings of a Plains Indian tepee, the rugs strewn on the floor of an Arab tent are the most exquisite fruits of those people's ability to express visual beauty. But these artifacts are an organic part of the dwelling; they are not separable from it. Even the great Roman frescoes and mosaics are still a structural part of the home. When visual decoration is present, it is always a part of an object with some religious or practical use: a weapon, a blanket, a dish, or a vase. The concept of a visual representation that is an end in itself, to be attended to for its aesthetic qualities alone, regardless of its use, is quite recent in history.

With the popularity of oil paintings, Europeans developed a portable, detachable object abstracted from any potential use. Art emerged as an autonomous entity, freed of its context of usefulness. Even Botticelli and Leonardo da Vinci spent a great deal of their time painting shop signs, carving bridal dowry chests, and sculpting saltshakers. Only well after the Renaissance could an artist survive economically from painting alone because only then were paintings accepted as objects worth paying attention to in their own right (Hauser, 1951). Whether this differentiation of art from everyday use constitutes an emancipation of the human psyche from constricting religious norms or even survival necessities - or an alienation from reality, as some claim  is a question that need not concern us here. We shall turn, instead, to a cursory inspection of the reasons respondents gave for cherishing the visual art objects in their homes.

As expected, Visual Art objects are not very meaningful to the youngest generation. Less than 10 percent of the children mentioned one or more pictures as special, as opposed to 37 and 22 percent of their parents and grandparents, respectively. This difference is, of course, extremely significant statistically, and it might reflect the youngsters' inability, or disinterest, in finding meanings in forms of two-dimensional representation. Perhaps for children even a realistic picture is too abstract and static to attract much attention. The reason for the strong drop in preference for pictures among the older generation is not so easy to explain.

One of the surprisingly few social class differences relating to the significance of objects concerns this category. Although 37 percent of the upper-middle class respondents singled out at least one picture as being special, only 14 percent of the lower-middle class did so (chi square, $\mathbf { \boldsymbol { \mathit { p } } } < . 0 0 0 1 )$ . The Visual Art objects were not only valued more frequently by upper-middle class respondents but, as measured by the living-room inventory conducted in each household at the conclusion of the interview, these persons also own significantly more Visual Art objects than those of the lower-middle class. Furthermore, the type of art object itself tends to be strongly influenced by social class, so that lower-middle class respondents tend to have a higher percentage of mass-produced art, whereas original art objects tend to be owned more frequently by the upper-middle class, regardless of whether or not these are mentioned as special. Although the upper-middle class can afford to own more pictures in general and certainly more original pictures, the reason for these differences is not primarily economic: Much of the visual art was far from expensive, and lower-class respondents often mentioned more costly objects such as cameras or stereo sets. Perhaps lower-class culture is still relatively indifferent to the artificial meaning of pictorial representation. Pictures acquired their legitimacy in the church and the palace where they served to represent the beliefs of religion and the ancestry of the aristocracy; they filtered down to the homes of the bourgeoisie as symbols of affluence and sensitivity. But they seem to have acquired only a precarious foothold in lower-middle class homes, where, when art is mentioned, there seems to be a greater reliance on icons of social and religious value, for example, Martin Luther King, John F. Kennedy, The Last Supper.

One would expect that the reasons given for the special attraction of Visual Art objects would pertain to their beauty, originality, aesthetic value, or the artist's skills; in short, with the intrinsic qualities of the picture. Yet this was rarely the case. Only 16 percent of the time were any aesthetic characteristics of the picture mentioned, and an additional 10 percent of the reasons dealt with what we coded as Style, or any decorative, fashion, or design aspect of an object. Again, a large percent of the answers considered past Memories (16 percent), Associations (5 percent), characteristics of the Self (10 percent), the Immediate Family (16 percent), and Nonkin relationship (12.5 percent) - in fact, pictures were the objects most often mentioned in the last class, suggesting that they are a main symbol of friendship.

Thus the bulk of significations carried by visual "works of art" is not connected to aesthetic values and experiences but refers to the immediate life history of their owners: reminding them of relatives and friends or of past events. People pay particular attention to pictures in their home because in doing so they relive memorable occasions and pleasing relationships. Of course, the interesting question is why pictures rather than appliances, let us say, or other things, serve this purpose so frequently. Perhaps something peculiar to a work of visual art enhances these experiences. The qualities invested by painters in their work, the order they bring to their paintings, presumably act as catalysts for attracting and directing the viewer's attention toward pleasant memories. Or, possibly, appropriate moods and sentiments are released because of the cultural conventions attributed to art.

Occasionally, some respondents mentioned aesthetic qualities of their pictures, although they are probably not the kind of reasons that a critic or connoisseur would find compelling:

It's a picture of a ship, under water. There's a certain light effect, and color effect. There are rays of light coming down on the sunken ship. It's the first time we ever bought any art and I really enjoyed that, looking at it.

Even this answer, which is relatively high in its concern for the intrinsic qualities of the object, seems to reveal a strong component of pleasure derived from the act of buying itself: The respondent does not seem sure whether he enjoys looking at the painting because of its artistic "effects" or because it indicates his first step toward becoming a collector. The following reasons for cherishing paintings are much more common.

Because my granddaughters made them. They are their handwork. Their Dad framed it for them . . . They know I appreciate it.

I fell in love with it (a yellow picture of a city skyline) when I first saw it and the colors are just right to fit in with the rest of the room. (Without it) I'd feel sad like the room was not coordinated.

My parents gave it (painting above the sofa) to us. They saw the empty space above the sofa and one day they brought us this picture to fill it. It's not my style, but they gave it to us so I keep it.

None of these reasons, which are quite typical, deal with the kind of experiences that art is supposed to provide. Yet, for better or for worse, paintings and prints - even if only pale reflections of the originals  seem to lend themselves readily to the construction of meaning in people's lives by becoming signs of cherished experiences and relationships.

## Photographs

If furniture and paintings are historically quite recent vehicles for carrying meaning in the household, photos are by comparison practically newborn. After all, paintings were used in ritual contexts as far back as thirty-thousand years ago, whereas photographs are only little more than a century old. In some respects one could make a case for treating photos as an evolved form of picture making, thus combining them with the Visual Art category. Yet the process of taking pictures is different enough from that of making pictures to preserve the distinction. First, the work is not primarily shaped by the concentrated attention of the artist; it results from the actions of a machine that was itself shaped by human intentions so that it could perform its task. With modern cameras it is hard not to take a decent picture. This does not necessarily imply that the photographic artist requires fewer skills or less concentration to produce a masterpiece; but the mediation of the machine alters the process of production and presumably that of appreciation as well.

The preference for photos even more than for visual art shows a dramatic age difference: 10 percent of the children mention at least one photo as being special, as compared to 22 percent of the parents and 37 percent of the grandparents $( \boldsymbol { p } < . \bar { 0 } 0 0 2 )$ . For the youngest generation Photographs are the sixteenth category in order of frequency, for grandparents they are the first. Are these differences due to progression through the life cycle per se or to secular changes unrelated to aging? It could be, for instance, that when the present grandparents were young, photos were much rarer and thus more cherished. If this were true, contemporary youngsters who take photography for granted will not feel that photos are special even when they have grown old. However, in looking at the meaning photos convey, one is led to conclude that their significance derives from the particular values that are paramount among the older respondents and which seem to be a result of their position along the life cycle.

Twenty-seven percent of all the reasons given for cherishing photos refer to Memories and 26 percent to the respondents' Immediate Family. No other object had such a high proportion of reasons in these two categories. Obviously, photographs are the prime vehicle for preserving the memory of one's close relations. For this reason they are often described as being "irreplaceable" by older respondents. When the picture represents a deceased relative, it often bears a freight of vivid emotions for people in the middle generation as well.

An adult woman, describing why a picture of her brother located in the front hall was special to her states:

It's the only formal picture that we have of him, and because it's one typical way that you realy remember him, like that's him. And too because he's gone, passed away.

When asked what it would mean not to have the thing, she broke down and started to cry. When she calmed down, she said:

"I am sorry, I couldn't answer that." A grandfather, describing the meaning of a snapshot of himself and his two brothers relates:

It goes back some 50 years, and it's almost like at that time, well it flashes back things that make you remember, you know — it's sentimentality . . . (at this point he started to cry and could barely talk . . . Asked if there were other things with special meaning he said): No nothing. I'm just not materialistic, nothing except that picture. (Later in the interview he described what it would mean not to have the photo.) Well, I guess I just wouldn't think of the things that looking at that picture recalls - it's just like a constant reminder, and if it weren't there I wouldn't recall them. I mean that picture came up by accident, and it laid around and it didn't do anything and then my wife put it on the television set and it makes you wonder, that's all. I wouldn't feel bad . . . I enjoy the memories it brings, but if it suddenly got destroyed I wouldn't cry about it, I mean it's gone, it's served its purpose . . like any other icon you use it long enough so that whether it's there or not there it would still be in your memory.

Although he emphasized that he is "not materialistic" and "wouldn't cry" if he lost the photo or any of his objects, the actual presence of the picture and the experience it recalls, upon reflection, were enough to bring this man to tears.

A grandmother, talking about family photos in her living room emphasizes the links to the distant roots of her family:

They are very special. I think as you get older, they become more important to you. These are pictures of my mother's side. They came through the Cumberland Gap, they were Irish and Welsh. One of the boys married a girl from another covered wagon, and those were my great-great-great grandparents. I think it was during Daniel Boone's time. These are very, very old pictures.

Others see photographs contributing to a sense of personal continuity:

You would miss all the unguarded moments in the children's growing up - playing in the yard, seeing the yard change and the surroundings change. Without them I think I would lose a lot of my past. It's related to my  our - past.

One woman expresses clearly the importance of photographs in this case, home movies - for the future identity of her descendants:

I have a lot of movies of the family from many years back. To me they are bigger treasures than any plate or picture of anything, because these can never be replaced. We have movies of when the children were small, and of grandparents, and including my own husband, and from way back when. Now if they were to get lost, they could not be possibly replaced. A piece of crescent china can be replaced. But movies of family that are not living anymore, you cannot replace these and these are what are important, more than any other item . . . A movie of a person that's not here today, in 50 years, for their descendants, you can show that movie and say: "This was your grandfather and grandmother, your aunt or your uncle"  it means something. They can see what the people actually look like.

More than any other object in the home, photos serve the purpose of preserving the memory of personal ties. In their ability to arouse emotion there is no other type of object that can surpass them; they are perhaps equaled only by the stereos mentioned by the youngest generation. Because photos bear the actual image of a departed kin, they can acquire an almost mystical identification with the deceased person. In most cultures around the world the memory of ancestors is preserved in one form or other. In some, such as ancient Rome or Japan, a house was not a home without a shrine where each departed person was represented by a symbol of his or her former existence. In our time photos seem to fulfill this function by imparting a tenuous immortality to beloved persons and by providing an identity, a context of belongingness, to one's descendants.

## Books

About one-fifth of the sample mentioned one or more books as being special: 15 percent of the children, 24 percent of the parents, and 26 percent of the grandparents. Twenty-seven percent of all the meanings referring to Embodiment of Ideals involved books, over twice the number of any other object in this category. Thus books remind people of values, goals, and achievements they seek to cultivate. Many give a variant of this reason for cherishing books: " 'Cause you can learn a lot and grow from them."

Often books are signs of a person's past success in school, or in some intellectual project, as was the case with this respondent explaining the significance of some language books:

I spent a summer . . . studying Sioux with my wife and some friends. It is an accomplishment, something that's not commonplace. How many people speak Japanese, French, Spanish, German, and Sioux?

Compared to photos and TV sets, ownership of books seems like a venerable institution. Yet it was not until the Reformation and the adoption of the printing press that books became accessible to any but the very wealthy or the very learned. And for some time the Bible was the only book that most families either wanted or could afford. Even now, the "good book" is the one singled out by many respondents as special:

(The family Bible) was sent to us from England. It's very important, because I'm so fortunate to have such a wonderful background. My grandparents were born in England and my father was one of fourteen children. And they all educated themselves. And my Dad memorized the Bible by heart and he passed an examination to preach and he could preach in any church. The Bible has such a significance because of my heritage, my background, which I'm very proud of.

Such statements are not concerned with the ideals of Christianity that saints and theologians have found in the Bible. Instead, they show a complex mixture of a need to belong, a need for self-respect bordering on pride, all wrapped in a religious tradition. In this respect, the Bible serves as a talisman of continuity:

(What would it mean to you not to have this Bible?) I would feel as though I had lost a friend, because when I open it and read the names of all the children, and they were so young and they all lived to be so old, none of them died at a young age. And when I see their pictures, I see I have good roots.

Of all the Religious reasons for cherishing objects, the great majority (36 percent) referred to books. For many professional men, whose identity as productive adults is intimately related to written knowledge, books signify a central dimension of the self. Although professional books are usually kept in the office rather than in the home, lawyers, doctors, teachers and other people whose livelihood depends on book knowledge keep some of these volumes in their homes. Many voice this fear of what it would mean to be deprived of such props of a professional identity: "That would be terrible. I would be very upset. It has something to do with my sense of being O.K. I am wrapped up a lot in those things."

The development and popularity of audio and visual media of communication in this century, such as telephones, radios, television, and so forth, seem to have made the craft of reading (and writing) less central than it was in the nineteenth century. But the significance of books in people's lives might be far richer than this cursory survey reveals. Books are often instrumental in developing the central theme in a person's life by providing a cultural model around which one can organize one's actions and goals (Csikszentmihalyi and Beattie, 1979). Specific books, ranging from Principia Mathematica to the Horatio Alger stories, from the Platonic Dialogs to Fahrenheit 451, have been mentioned as giving direction and purpose to one's life. In this general overview the theme that emerges is that books, more than any other kind of objects, are special to people because they serve to embody ideals and to express religious and professional values.

## Stereos

One-fifth of the respondents also mentioned stereo sets or tape players as one of their special possessions. This category of objects shows one of the most skewed distributions by age, a trend that is almost the reverse mirror image of that found for photographs. Here 46 percent of the youngest generation mentions a stereo set versus 18 percent of their parents and only 6 percent of grandparents (chi square, $\begin{array} { r } { \dot { p } < . 0 0 0 1 \rangle } \end{array}$ . It is, of the 41 object categories, the most frequently mentioned by children. This trend might reflect in part a cohort difference in exposure. Stereos became widely available only after persons of the grandparents' generation grew to maturity, and thus they might not have had time to become attached to these instruments. But the same argument could be made about television sets, yet older people find them more special than their children do. Therefore the younger person's attraction to stereos cannot be explained only in terms of familiarity with technology; it is probably bound up with the extraordinary importance music has in the lives of teenagers. Everyone knows the central place popular music has assumed in the youth culture over the last two decades, yet no thorough explanation of this phenomenon exists. What the children in our sample say begins to suggest the kind of relationships youths have with the stereo and the music emanating from it.

Basically, most of the reasons are summarized in the following quotes:

Because when I'm not real happy and gay, I turn it on and it makes me happy again . . . (What would it mean not to have it?) It would mean that all my good days would turn into bad days . . . 'cause it helps me recover good, recover from the bad days.

The same theme pervades the answer of an adult male, a policeman:

Well I like music and I spend a lot of time listening to it . . . so I would be kind of lost without it . . . It's just a way of soothing me, if I've had a rough night, made a lot o arrests, have to write up a review, prepare to go to court, it's just sooting, it would irritate me a bit if I didn't have it.

Thus the music made so accessible by records and tapes seems to act as a modulator of emotions, a way of compensating for negative feelings. The importance of this function is particularly important in adolescence when daily swings of mood are significantly greater than in the middle years and much greater than in later life (Larson et al., 1980). But a stereo is not just like an "upper" or "downer" drug to be taken passively when the need arises, it also allows an active involvement of the person with the machine. Talking about his tape deck, a teenager explains:

I like to use that and this, and mess around and make weird sounds and everything, and play them back . . . Not having it wouldn't really hurt me a whole lot, but it'd take out a big hunk of the day.

On the whole, stereos are most often justified as special in terms of both the experience they provide (28 percent) and references to the self. In this, they resemble television sets most closely and are most dissimilar from photos and visual art. When a person mentioned Release as the reason for cherishing an object  the escape it provided, the venting of frustration  chances are that the object referred to was a stereo; 17 percent of the Release reasons concerned this category, followed by Musical Instruments (15 percent).

## Musical instruments

The ability to master sound has always been one of the supreme achievements of any culture. In Chapter 2 we mentioned how the bullroarer represented the spirit of the tribe for the Australian Aborigine and gave a concrete expression to the sacred forces abroad in the universe, or how the tribal trumpets were used by pygmies to awaken their gods and restore peace in the forest. Drums, pipes, and strings were always associated with solemn rituals and momentous occasions.

In our sample, musical instruments were mentioned by onefifth of the people, as often as books and stereos. As with stereos, their frequency was highest among the youngest generation (32 percent), half of that among the adults (17 percent), and onethird among the elderly (10 percent), again suggesting the declining importance of music with age. The most frequent reasons for cherishing musical instruments were references to the Self (24 percent) and Experiences (22 percent). At the same time, Immediate Family (17 percent), Memories (10 percent), and Personal Values (9 percent) were also relatively frequent.

For many people a piano or guitar is the only means through which they can cultivate any kind of creative expression. Therefore musical instruments are much more actively related to the person's achievements and values than stereos could ever be. For many adults, a musical instrument appears to be a central symbol of a life-style once cherished or anticipated in the future.

A very successful lawyer, for instance, who lived in an imposing home with his handsome family, described most of his possessions with a detached indifference. Toward the end of the interview he was asked - as the others were  what his most private object was. At this question he paused, looking thoughtful, and then invited the interviewer into the basement family room where from an old chest he carefully unpacked a trombone. It turned out he had played it in college, and for the middle-aged lawyer it epitomized a life of freedom and spontaneity on which he looked back with nostalgia. Even now, when depressed or overwhelmed with responsibilities, he would retire to the basement and blow on the old trombone.

A similar reason is given by another man favoring a baritone ukulele:

Well, I enjoy music, I started playing it back in college. Playing it brings back fun recollections of college, I enjoy it, the whole family enjoys music, my wife and I have had a lot of fun with it. It's got those kinds of meanings and reflections.

Here we see a whole complex set of meanings condensed in this one object: It allows the man to use his skills in musical expressions, to have fun in the present while reliving past enjoyment, and at the same time, sharing the fun with those he loves. The ukulele in this case is a catalyst for a many-sided experience; it is not only an instrument for making sounds but is also a tool for a variety of pleasurable emotions. In playing it this man recaptures the past and binds his consciousness to that of others around him.

In still another case the man we interviewed had just given up a well-paid managerial job and was embarking on an uncertain life, possibly centering around a career as a folk singer. This shift was concretely illustrated by the contents of the home: He had just sold his old furniture, had gotten rid of all the objects associated with his former self  only four old guitars were left hanging on the wall, eloquent signs of a radical change in life-style.

However, in general, musical instruments tend to evoke one's children or spouse as well as the self and its values. Parents often talk with pride of their son's or daughter's prowess when they mention a piano or violin. In a few cases music is an activity that the whole family pursues together, apparently achieving some of that collective sentiment of which Durkheim spoke, in the shared enjoyment resulting from the integrated use of skills.

## Television sets

Of all the household objects, none has been as controversial as the television set. TV has been charged with destroying the American family, hypnotizing children into passive habits, and encouraging aggression. At the same time, this medium has been hailed as the means of restoring human interconnectedness because it provides an instant sharing of information and emotions across continents and cultures.

This ambiguous appraisal is reflected by the kind of experience people report while watching television. In some of our previous studies it was found that adolescents and adults watch television more than they do any other single activity. When they are watching, they report feeling more relaxed than other times of the day; but they rate their moods as being significantly more passive, weak, drowsy, and irritable (Csikszentmihalyi and Kubey, 1981).

In the present study 21 percent of the respondents mentioned a TV set as being special to them, males significantly more often than females (29 vs. 14 percent; p < .002). The youngest generation cherishes these objects most (37 percent), then the oldest (23 percent), whereas the middle generation mentions them least frequently (11 percent).

Often reasons given for appreciating TV sets are tinged by guilt, as if the respondent were talking about an addiction on which he or she has become dependent. The following quotations from teenagers are quite typical:

If you are real tired, it's sorta like reading books. You can sorta let that do the work for you. I really spend a whole lot of time in front of it. So I'd be doing a lot of nothing and being really bored without the TV.

(Without a stereo) I couldn't listen to music a lot. And I like to listen to music. I'd have to watch TV. And it's usually really boring, the TV programs.

This one from an elderly grandmother;

I just love it. I would miss it terribly because I'm alone. I have to rest my back on the bed so it's easier to look at television than it is to read.

It is difficult to decide to what extent this defensiveness concerning television is genuine and to what extent it is a reflection of what the respondents construe that social expectations should be. Given the great furor about TV, people do not readily admit enjoying it without reserve. Yet in the majority of cases one senses that people, in fact, use the medium simply as a pacifier, as a passive source of experience when all else fails, or when one is too tired to seek genuine experiences. Television viewing is essentially a vicarious social activity, because the viewer is almost constantly confronted with representations of other people engaged in various types of interaction. Occasionally, however, one meets a fullfledged enthusiast, like this woman whose house contains no fewer than six television sets and ten telephones:

I love TV. I really do believe that it will save the whole world. You know  instant communication will alleviate a lot of problems . . . It would be hard to live without our TVs  we are accustomed to getting our information that way. Nothing touches it! It's total involvement. After the essentials, it's the most important thing to have. I used to be a social worker and I would always recommend TV to poor people. It's our window to the world. If they don't have an education, they sure would get it from TV. It's McLuhanesque  the content is not important . . . it's the existence of TV. I feel real strongly about that.

The protelevision ideology is quite clear in this quotation, which proves again that one can find excellent reasons pro and con, to legitimize or to criticize almost any given position. Or to put it more constructively, one might say that a complex object like a television set can be interacted with at many levels. At the simplest level one can use it as a background pacifier, a source of painless stimulation to distract a mind bored by inactivity but unready to face a more taxing challenge. Or it can be used with control, selectivity, and discernment; if approached this way, one can cultivate the activity and "believe that it will save the whole world." This variability in involvement is not only true of TV, of course, for it can apply to any other object. The reason "primitive" people believe in the power of magic objects, which to us seem trivial knickknacks, is that they concentrate considerable attention in the power objects and thus, in fact, embody them with psychic energy. Similarly, sacramental objects acquire power in the Catholic church, or the products of science in a culture that holds science itself as sacred.

In general, television sets stand out among household objects by having both the highest frequency of references to the Self and to Experiences (34 and 32 percent, respectively) and the fewest proportion of meanings associated with Memories (0 percent). Clearly, for this sample at least, TVs are tools for experiencing the present. They are not good vehicles for binding people to their own past or future, or for bringing them closer to others. This, of course, is in great part due to the rapid obsolescence of a TV set. As with stereos and other electronic products, the rapid improvements of TVs and quick turnover make it difficult to conceive that they could ever be associated with past events and memories. Respondents rarely cherish the memories of viewed television shows, rather, it is the habit of viewing itself that is valued. Thus television socializes primarily by providing habitual, low-intensity experiences that are valued as ongoing enjoyment and release rather than as memorable occasions.

## Sculpture

This category parallels the two-dimensional category of Visual Arts; that is, it includes all three-dimensional artifacts, excluding furniture and weavings, that respondents mention as special, ranging from original pieces by recognized artists to inexpensive mass-produced replicas. As with Visual Art objects, sculpture is a favorite of the middle generation; children rarely mention it, but it is the third favorite object of their parents. There is also a significant sex difference, in that women mention sculpture more than twice as often as men (26 vs. 11 percent, chi square, p < .001).

In several other respects sculpture and visual arts produce the same meanings: They reflect Memories, Associations, Intrinsic Qualities, and involve feelings about the Self and the Immediate Family in approximately the same proportions as paintings do.

They are more apt to carry formal ties, such as ethnic and religious associations, and relatively fewer meanings relating to friends.

Again, as in the case with paintings, the most surprising thing is how seldom aesthetic qualities of sculptures are ever mentioned. There is no reference to plastic art as the arena in which Praxiteles, Michelangelo, and Rodin wrought their great masterpieces, a hallowed craft to be approached with reverence and a refined sensitivity. Most people, perhaps fortunately or not, have a much more straightforward approach to the pieces of sculpture that they keep in their homes.

Our favorite example pertains to a woman who showed the interviewer a clumsy epoxy figurine representing the Venus of Milo as one of her most special objects. In describing it she said "It's unusual 'cause it doesn't have arms. I got it (as a prize) at a demonstration through a point system. I would feel bad because I really worked at getting it." What made this reproduction important has nothing to do with cultural canons of taste nor with the intrinsic quality of the object. She liked it because it reminded her of the hard work she put into a sales demonstration and the recognition that she received for it, and because of the zany idea of making a statue without arms.

As with most other objects, sculptures frequently stand for family relationships:

I am going to keep this thing (a bust in a teenage girl's mother's room) forever. I wasn't even in school and me and my mother went to the store and I told her this looked like her, so she bought it. I'm going to keep this for life. It reminds me of my mother.

They show people through my daughter's eyes who made them and they are very beautiful . : . I would pick up, pick them all up if the house burned down, I would feel very sad if any of them were destroyed.

Perhaps one can identify more easily with sculpture than with painting; the greater realism of three dimensions adds a lifelike and tangible quality to sculpture that painting lacks. Sometimes this process of identification is quite complex. An old black man, who had worked as a domestic helper for wealthy families during most of his life, gave the impression throughout the interview that nothing in his home mattered much to him. What counted, he repeatedly said, was that the objects be useful, comfortable, and cheap. Toward the end of the interview, however, a look of recognition passed over his face; he walked to the mantle shelf and pointed at two black porcelain figurines representing crouching panthers. These, he said, were special to him in a way that the other things were not. He told a long story about how he had always admired panthers and that his nephew, who was aware of this predilection, during a trip to the South found these two statues in a pawnshop window in Nashville and called him up, asking if he should buy them? The old man said yes and the nephew bought the panthers, which have been crouching above the fireplace ever since.

The admiration for the panthers, he explained, stems from the fact that these animals are cool, wise to the ways of the jungle, full of a hidden strength and vitality. "They are so smooth, so powerful, yet they don't scarcely show it." He himself wished to have the same qualities and in part thought he did. At this point the interviewer, struck by the obvious connection, asked the man if the two felines also related in his mind to the Black Panther ethnopolitical movement. The question seemed to produce genuine surprise in the respondent. No, he said, the thought had never occurred to him. If this is true, we have here a case of a man spontaneously inventing a personal symbol that other men of his race had already chosen, presumably for similar reasons: The animals suggest ideal qualities that are particularly important to this grouprestrained power, elegance, inscrutability, and, of course, blackness.

## Plants

It is probable that if we had conducted our interviews ten years earlier, indoor plants would not have figured prominently among the most special household objects. As it turned out, 15 percent of our respondents mentioned plants. Most were women: Of the 47 people who did, only 7 were men.

The use of plants for decorative purposes in the home seems to have a short history, at least in the West. Again, the practice must have originated with royalty and the aristocracy; it was in the palaces of the sixteenth-century French monarchs that orangeries and other growing plants were established. The next spurt seems to have occurred when the Victorian British middle class began to adopt in its living rooms the various exotic plants imported from the far colonies. Of course, there has always been a demotic use of flowers by the peasants of Europe; these, however, were usually arranged on balconies and windowsills, and thus were a part of the home only liminally.

Whatever use plants have had in the past, the practice seems to have lacked an ideology. Although the number of plants kept in the average urban household has increased during the seventies, the significance of their cultivation for a large segment of the population has changed even more. Plants now carry a number of meanings that were previously inarticulated or at least not expressed with their current urgency.

This can be seen in the fact that Plants were mentioned as embodying Personal Values more than any other type of object, including Books. The other large classes of meaning associated with Plants were Experiences (21 percent), Style (14 percent), and the Self (23 percent).

The values that plants represent involve nurturance, the caring for living things that respond to one's attention. Growing plants provides evidence of one's skills, thus they are like trophies that record one's accomplishments. But perhaps the most important meaning that plants evoke deals with the "ecological consciousness" that has emerged only in the past decade as a full-fledged cultural value. For urban dwellers, indoor plants represent a tie with a natural world threatened by the encroachments of technology, a way of bringing nature into the city, of having living things that require almost daily attention growing in their own apartment or home. Those who care for them are able to feel that they are contributing, however slightly, to the preservation of the environment. Here is an ideologically complete reason given by a female respondent:

Few people can formulate their relationship with plants (or with any other object) so clearly. Most people take the interaction for granted, assuming that it must be valued because it is the "in" thing. The respondent just quoted is one of those rare cultural innovators who attempt to give legitimacy to a behavior pattern by explicating its meaning, which she does by drawing cause-and-effect connections between the object in question and other, presumably valued, conditions. Plants "purify the air," "their shapes and shadows" are beautiful, they make the house "feel alive," they are therapeutic, and so forth. For an object to acquire meanings there must be a number of individuals who can perform this task of legitimation. Then the rest take the already legitimized symbol and use it without much further thought:

I have around a hundred plants . . . I bought a lot of them and a lot of them were given to me by friends like through the last ten years or so. (Well, why exactly are they special?) Well, I just like to take care of plants and I think they are pretty and I just like 'em.

Because they are growing and not dying and they are alive . . . and I am actually doing it. (What would it mean to be without them?) Less messing around in the dirt, but I think the house would be sort of empty . . . They kind of add to the house and the atmosphere, so I would miss them.

I love them . . . I like looking at them. It's healthy for you. Some I've managed to get to bloom, but others I just can't.

They are very decorative and I found out I have a green thumb. Some of them need to be repotted. My daughter gave them to me . . . They make the apartment look very nice.

These four respondents agree that plants are "pretty" and "nice," but they accept these labels without question. One says that they are "healthy for you"; however, the meaning is not developed, but seems to be taken for granted. Of course, an effective symbol need not be logically or empirically understood: It is often a more powerful influence when unself-consciously accepted. People can save a great deal of psychic energy by simply accepting the fact that plants are pretty and healthy, without having to bother about what these values explicitly mean  that is, what causal links are inputed by these designations. Once the symbolic value of the object is accepted (in this case, when plants are accepted as being nice), it can be put to a variety of uses: to fill up and beautify the house, to show one's horticultural skills, to remind oneself of the friends and daughters who gave plants (those nice, healthy things) as presents.

This analysis has stressed the social legitimation of objects as symbols. It might seem that we are suggesting that any object, no matter what it is and how it looks, could be made to seem beautiful and wholesome by a cultural assignment of meanings. To a certain extent, in exceptional cases this appears to be the case: Contemporary art critics are able, for instance, to justify self-mutilation, the wreckage of automobiles, and termite colonies as having artistic value - and a small segment of the population actually accepts these meanings as legitimate. But in the case of plants a more universal process is involved. Plants actually do possess some of those causal attributes that cultural legitimation articulates about them. They are generally found to be attractive because that is their purpose, otherwise they would not have survived. During the long ages in which evolution proceeded without the benefit of human meddling, a plant that was unable to attract the attention of insects had fewer chances to pollinate than a more attractive plant and thus was less able to reproduce. Therefore "attractiveness" had a positive survival value for plants. This trend was reinforced when humans became capable of deciding which plants were to survive and which were superfluous. Those that were able to attract attention - because of the color of their flowers, their unusual shape, the texture of their leaves  tended to be cultivated for decorative purposes. Similarly, it is in fact true that plants grow, they respond to the grower (i.e., they either die or stay alive); they are more or less "natural"; and they "purify the air" (even though the role of houseplants in this process is rather questionable).

So the meanings that the culture assigns to plants are not made out of whole cloth; there is a factual basis to the causal connections attributed to them. But most of the common houseplants now in use are not indigenous to the Chicago area nor even to the United States. Thus their very presence is not itself natural but depends on the cultural trend of "house" plants. Therefore to make them a viable cultural sign, some people must articulate the natural connections, emphasize their positive aspects, play down or explain away the unpleasant features - in short, legitimize the value of the object. This process of refinement, then, results in a condensed symbol that has a recognized set of values in the grammar of meanings: The object (in this case, plants) evokes a specific range of emotions and thoughts and transmits its values to other objects, behaviors, or persons with which it is associated. Thus a house that contains plants becomes "pretty" and "full of life"; a person who tends flowers gets in touch with "nature," grows as a person, and helps to make the world healthier; a person who gives plants as a gift is sensitive, communicates an appreciation for beauty and the life process, and so on.

## Plates

The tenth category of objects, mentioned by 15 percent of the respondents, included a variety of eating and drinking utensils: dishes, china, cups, mugs, and pewter trays. Although these are all objects ostensibly made for use, again relatively few people found them special for utilitarian reasons. An observer from another planet, unacquainted with human ways, might be surprised to learn that such humble vessels could carry so much meaning. To those acquainted with popular psychology, the explanation might seem embarassingly obvious: after all, oral needs are quite basic; and besides, containers of this sort could have deep sexual connotations.

But whatever unconscious reasons might have prompted the selection of plateware as a significant symbol, the meaning these objects carried for our respondents were fairly straightforward. They were the objects most often mentioned in connection with the category "Ethnic Background," and, after Furniture, they constituted the next most often mentioned "Heirloom." In line with this emphasis on memories and associations, plateware was found to be significantly more special to women than to men and to the older than to the younger respondents.

The reasons given are those that are by now familiar: ties to a person or a place; shared origins or a common issue:

(The cups and saucers) belonged to my mother, wedding gifts which she brought with her from England in 1905. And whenever anybody had a baby or a birthday, they always gave a cup and saucer. And then when they knew that my mother had saved hers, they came to me. So that's why they're important . . . I have them on display.

This cup . . . my grandmother brought it back from Newfoundland when she went back home there on a trip 65-70 years ago. That's how long I've had it, and it's not even cracked. It's so old. She brought that back for me and a cream pitcher for my sister. And my sister's kids broke hers. So I'm kind of proud that I've still got it.

## A father said:

Well, the most important things would be the pewter mugs which have been in my family since the 1700s. They are things that I inherited from my mother, who just passed away. (Without them) I think part of my family tradition would be missing. I intend to carry that forward. Even the few family heirlooms we've had, I've treasured. We want to keep the tradition in the family. At Christmas, when the children got old enough, I passed out some of the things that I had treasured.

These quotes raise an important issue, one that might help explain the psychological value of china and other easily broken objects, such as glass, which was also fairly frequently mentioned by women (12 percent of the time). Given a number of fragile objects, the majority of them are soon bound to be broken. To preserve a breakable object from its destiny one must pay at least some attention to it, care for it, buffet it from the long arm of chance. Thus a china cup preserved over a generation is a victory of human purpose over chaos, an accomplishment to be quietly cherished, something to be "kind of proud" of.

Not surprisingly, it is the people in the generation of the grandparents who are most sensitive to the expressive potential of fragile plateware. It could be that having witnessed the dissolution of many relationships, the decay of many forms of structured order, they appreciate the meaning of an unbroken dish.

This does not imply that the only reason plates were chosen to preserve memories is their weakness  which, paradoxically, highlights strength. After all, symbols not only carry multiple meanings for people (Turner, 1967), they are also multidetermined. Possibly, for instance, women pay particular attention to eating utensils because dishes and cups are part of a housewife's "tools," like the hunting spear is to the Nuer. All these reasons might be involved in the choice of these objects as carriers of meaning. But once the choice was made, the values communicated refer to one's roots, to one's kind, and to overcoming the forces of physical and social disorder and dissolution.

These brief sketches of the ten most popular objects begin to give an idea of what people cherish in their homes, and why. It would be too tedious, and not very enlightening, to discuss the remaining 31 categories of objects, each of which was mentioned by less than 10 percent of the people, and in some cases only a few times. In later chapters we shall return to some of these minor categories, to illustrate a point. Now let us pause and consider what we have learned by this cursory analysis of cherished household possessions.

The first impression one receives in reviewing the evidence is the personal nature of the themes evoked by the objects that people surround themselves with in their homes. Table 3.2 lists the frequency with which all the meaning categories were mentioned. The two most frequent categories of meaning were the ones coded Self (mentioned by 87 percent of the respondents) and Enjoyment (mentioned by 79 percent). These two categories generally overlapped because objects providing enjoyment almost always were coded also as having reference to the personal self. When a reason was phrased: "I like to work with these tools," "TV is entertaining," "I dig my bed," or "Guns. Shooting is my hobby," it was coded in both the Self and the Enjoyment categories.

Thus the main single reason for having objects is one that might be seen as egocentric and hedonistic. It might be useful to distinguish at this point hedonistic pleasure from enjoyment. The former refers to a value derived from satisfaction that is an end in itself; it is the consummation of a feeling and not the meaning or purpose of that feeling that makes the difference. Whatever will make one "feel good" is pleasurable regardless of what effects this has on one's other goals or on the goals of others. Enjoyment, by contrast, results from the purpose aimed at by the activity and intrinsically involves the integration of the pleasurable feeling with one's context of goals. Enjoyment, then, is a purposeful feeling inseparable from the interaction and not merely a subjective, individual sensation. It implies self-control, the development of skills in the pursuit of voluntary as opposed to spontaneous goals.

In a game of tennis, for example, pleasure might constitute the euphoria resulting from the physical activity of the body or in winning against a competitor. Typically, these sensations are ends that do not lead to further goals. Enjoyment in the game might be derived from reflecting on one's most skillful moves, the perfection of the game, the interaction among the players  in other words, from a relationship between the person and a pattern of goals that has an inherent potential for further growth.

When a person mentions his or her tools as a source of enjoyment, the meaning referred to is egocentric, but not necessarily hedonistic, for interaction with tools is valued not only because of the positive physical sensations it provides but also because it promotes the cultivation of new experiences and goals. One cannot enjoy the use of tools unless one learns to build objects that approximate more and more closely some ideal of efficency, beauty, or permanence. It could be said that enjoyment is the subjective feeling of cultivation.

Table 3.2. Proportion of respondents mentioning various classes and categories of meaning for cherishing special objects (N = 315)
<table><tr><td colspan="3">A. Person-related reasons</td><td colspan="3">B. Non-person-related reasons</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Percentage of people mentioning</td><td></td><td></td><td>Percentage of people mentioning</td></tr><tr><td>1. Self</td><td></td><td>87</td><td>1. Memories</td><td></td><td>74</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="9">2.</td><td>Immediate Family</td><td>82</td><td></td><td>Memento Recollection</td><td>52 46</td></tr><tr><td>Spouse</td><td>34</td><td></td><td>Heirloom</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>We</td><td>33</td><td>Souvenir</td><td></td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>Children</td><td>35</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mother</td><td>27</td><td>2. Associations</td><td></td><td>52</td></tr><tr><td>Father</td><td>20</td><td></td><td>Ethnic</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Siblings</td><td>11</td><td></td><td>Religious</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Grandparents</td><td>12</td><td></td><td>Collections</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>Grandchildren</td><td>7</td><td>Gifts</td><td></td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>Whole Family</td><td>22</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>86</td></tr><tr><td>3. Kin</td><td>23</td><td></td><td>3. Experiences Enjoyment</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Relatives</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>79</td></tr><tr><td>Ancestors</td><td></td><td>9 7</td><td>Ongoing Occasion Release</td><td></td><td>48</td></tr><tr><td>In-laws</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>11</td><td></td><td>4. Intrinsic Qualities</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="9"></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Craft</td><td>62</td></tr><tr><td>. Nonfamily Friends</td><td>40</td><td></td><td></td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>24</td><td></td><td>Uniqueness</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>Associates</td><td>9</td><td></td><td>Physical</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Heroes</td><td>20</td><td></td><td>Description</td><td>46</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>5. Style</td><td></td><td>60</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>6. Utilitarian</td><td></td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>7. Personal Values</td><td></td><td>53</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Embodiment of Ideal</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Accomplishment</td><td>31</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Personification</td><td>15</td></tr></table>

Elsewhere this state of enjoyable interaction has been called the flow state and its parameters described (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975; 1978). Apparently one of the main reasons people cherish objects in their homes is that they facilitate flow experiences. However, because we know that the objects most often mentioned as sources of enjoyment were TV sets and stereos, we can infer that most of the flow referred to was low in complexity, more akin to pleasure than to enjoyment.

The second major theme is that of kinship; of the ties that bind people to each other  that provide continuity in one's life and across generations. On the whole, 82 percent of the people cherished at least one object because it reminded them of a close relative. But numbers do not begin to express the importance of kinship ties. It is the cumulative effect of hearing people talk about their parents, spouses, and children, the depth of their emotions in doing so, that is so impressive. The quotes reported earlier in this chapter should give the reader some flavor of the importance of these attachments; in later chapters we shall elaborate further on this theme.

The third theme concerns the lack of certain relationships rather than their presence. In addition to meanings dealing with the self, and with one's kin and friends, there could have been a third level of interactions represented in the home, a level referring to a wider area of meanings. One might have expected artifacts that reminded the owner of his or her ethnic background, political allegiance, cultural preferences and values. After all, homes in the past were supposed to be centered around household gods, crucifixes, icons, historical pictures, flags - symbols of attachment to widely shared cultural ideals. Such objects, however, were conspicuous by their absence. Only 7 percent mentioned religious meanings, and 9 percent, ethnic ones. Political allegiance was not represented visibly in the home, except for the pictures of a few "heroes" like John F. Kennedy or Martin Luther King. The meaning category "Embodiment of an Ideal," mentioned by 24 percent of the people, was the most frequent in this area. But the ideals mentioned were often very fragmentary and idiosyncratic; the closest to a widely shared cultural ideal was perhaps the ecological consciousness symbolized by plants.

The reasons people give for cherishing their household possessions reveal a picture of the meaning of life for urban Americans that is in some respects familiar but in others, strikingly unexpected in its detail. We get a sense of a life in which immediate experience, a search for enjoyment, is important. At the same time, one feels an an almost equally strong desire to remember the good times of the past and especially to preserve the relationships experienced with people very close to oneself. This search for meaning seems to proceed in almost complete vacuum of formal goals and values. This does not mean that goals and values are absent. They are often implicit in the other reasons about which respondents talk. But none of the great spiritual and ideological systems that are supposed to have moved people in the past have left objective traces in the homes of these Americans nor has a new configuration as yet taken their place.

Another generalization that the findings suggest is the enormous flexibility with which people can attach meanings to objects, and therefore derive meanings from them. Almost anything can be made to represent a set of meanings. It is not as if the physical characteristics of an object dictated the kind of significations it can convey, although these characteristics often lend themselves to certain meanings in preference to others; nor do the symbolic conventions of the culture absolutely decree what meaning can or cannot be obtained from interaction with a particular object. At least potentially, each person can discover and cultivate a network of meanings out of the experiences of his or her own life.

This is illustrated in Table 3.3, where one sees that every object category can serve to convey a meaning in each meaning class. One person even cherished a TV set as a carrier of memories; and another, plants, a painting, and a sculpture for utilitarian reasons - these were the most unlikely associations between objects and meanings. All other object-meaning combinations were mentioned at least twice or more often. The process of creating signification is not entirely determined by prior cultural convention.

At the same time, Table 3.3 also indicates that although each person is free to attach any meaning to any object, in fact, some things stand for Memories much more often than others, whereas other objects recall Experiences or Personal Values more frequently. In this specialization of meaning both the object's physical characteristics and the values attributed to it in the culture at large seem to play a determining role. We have seen, for instance, that TV and stereo sets most often signify the Self; photos, the Immediate Family; and paintings, Nonfamily. Photos specialize in preserving Memories, sculptures embody Associations, and so on down the line.

Table 3..Distributn and percentage f meanin casses makg up the object categories
<table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Furniture</td><td colspan="2">Visual art</td><td colspan="2">Sculpture</td><td colspan="2">Musical instruments</td></tr><tr><td>Memories</td><td>98</td><td>15.4</td><td>84</td><td>15.6</td><td>73</td><td>18.0</td><td>25</td><td>10.4</td></tr><tr><td>Associations</td><td>35</td><td>5.5</td><td>28</td><td>5.2</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td>8</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>Experiences</td><td>69</td><td>10.8</td><td>47</td><td>8.8</td><td>36</td><td>8.9</td><td>52</td><td>21.7</td></tr><tr><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td>56</td><td>8.8</td><td>86</td><td>16.0</td><td>46</td><td>11.3</td><td>8</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>Style</td><td>80</td><td>12.5</td><td>56</td><td>10.4</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td>15</td><td>6.3</td></tr><tr><td>Personal Values</td><td>27</td><td>4.2</td><td>24</td><td>4.5</td><td>22</td><td>5.4</td><td>21</td><td>8.8</td></tr><tr><td>Utilitarian</td><td>34</td><td>5.3</td><td>1</td><td>.2</td><td>1</td><td>.3</td><td>5</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Self</td><td>106</td><td>16.6</td><td>54</td><td>10.1</td><td>47</td><td>11.6</td><td>57</td><td>23.8</td></tr><tr><td>Immediate Family</td><td>98</td><td>15.4</td><td>84</td><td>15.6</td><td>58</td><td>14.3</td><td>41</td><td>17.1</td></tr><tr><td>Kin</td><td>18</td><td>2.8</td><td>6</td><td>1.1</td><td>10</td><td>2.5</td><td>2</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfamily</td><td>17</td><td>2.7</td><td>67</td><td>12.5</td><td>19</td><td>4.7</td><td>6</td><td>2.5</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>638</td><td>100.0</td><td>537</td><td>100.0</td><td>406</td><td>100.0</td><td>240</td><td>100.0</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Photos</td><td colspan="2">Televisions Stereos</td><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Books</td><td colspan="2">Plants</td></tr><tr><td>Memories</td><td>79</td><td>26.7</td><td>1</td><td>.6</td><td>16</td><td>7.6</td><td>29</td><td>11.3</td><td></td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><td>Associations</td><td>5</td><td>1.7</td><td>5</td><td>2.8</td><td>7</td><td>3.3</td><td>22</td><td>8.6</td><td>8</td><td>4.1</td></tr><tr><td>Experiences</td><td>27</td><td>9.1</td><td>56</td><td>31.5</td><td>59</td><td>28.1</td><td>50</td><td>19.5</td><td></td><td>21.3</td></tr><tr><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td>49</td><td>16.6</td><td></td><td>2.3</td><td>4</td><td>1.9</td><td>10</td><td>3.9</td><td>13</td><td>7.7</td></tr><tr><td>Style</td><td>8</td><td>2.7</td><td></td><td>1.1</td><td>7</td><td>3.3</td><td>3</td><td>1.2</td><td>24</td><td>14.2</td></tr><tr><td>Personal Values</td><td>7</td><td>2.4</td><td>N</td><td>3.9</td><td>4</td><td>1.9</td><td>37</td><td>14.5</td><td>25</td><td>14.8</td></tr><tr><td>Utilitarian</td><td>2</td><td>.7</td><td>20</td><td>11.2</td><td>17</td><td>8.1</td><td>14</td><td>5.5</td><td>1</td><td>.6</td></tr><tr><td>Self</td><td>22</td><td>7.4</td><td>60</td><td>33.7</td><td>68</td><td>32.4</td><td>58</td><td>22.7</td><td>39</td><td>23.1</td></tr><tr><td>Immediate Family</td><td>77</td><td>26.0</td><td>17</td><td>9.6</td><td>21</td><td>10.0</td><td>19</td><td>7.4</td><td>14</td><td>8.3</td></tr><tr><td>Kin</td><td>13</td><td>4.4</td><td>2</td><td>1.1</td><td>2</td><td>1.0</td><td>3</td><td>1.2</td><td>1</td><td>.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfamily</td><td>7</td><td>2.4</td><td>4</td><td>2.3</td><td>5</td><td>2.4</td><td>11</td><td>4.3</td><td>2</td><td>1.2</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>296</td><td>100.0</td><td>178</td><td>100.0</td><td>210</td><td>100.0</td><td>256</td><td>100.0</td><td>169</td><td>100.0</td></tr></table>

This preliminary overview, by necessity cumbersome in its details, has also raised another set of issues. Thus far we have attempted to give a general summary of the object relationships for the sample as a whole. However, in describing specific objects and meanings, we have seen that these relationships are unequally distributed. Some are characteristic of youth, others of old people; some are more prevalent among men, some among women. This suggests that the cultivation of the self might involve transactions with different types of objects, depending on one's sex role and position along the life cycle. It is to these issues that we shall now turn.
