> 来源：The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## CHAPTER 4

## Object relations and the development of the self

By reaching for a mobile hanging above the crib and setting it in motion with a touch, a baby learns a tremendously important fact: "I can make that thing dance if I want to." An infant starts life with precious little information about the self. At first he or she is aware only of strong feelings of hunger, pain, or delight, which come and go unbidden, and of soothing sensations whenever fed or fondled. Slowly sensory experiences coalesce into predictable patterns, and the outlines of the environment begin to emerge. The infant, although still largely a passive bundle of sensations moved by genetic instructions and random actions, begins to recognize parts of the body and where the boundaries lie that separate that self from others.

Taking possession of this body and transforming dim awareness into a conscious self, the infant learns to connect the action he or she receives with those needs that were satisfied. This is the first evidence that the baby gets of his or her existence as an autonomous agent, capable of independent action. Setting a mobile in motion and seeing it dance at the touch of the fingers might well be the infant's earliest experience of selfhood.

The self grows largely as a function of environmental responses to intentions; it develops out of feedback to acts of control (Seligman, 1975, p. 141). The infant becomes aware of wanting food, company, freedom to crawl; the psychic energy of the infant becomes channeled in order to realize these intentions. By reflecting on  that is, by turning attention to  these intentions, the child discovers the self  the source of those wants from which the intentions emerged. When the baby gets food to avoid hunger, or company when lonely, the child's self grows stronger, by learning that his or her intentions are effective. When desires are frustrated, however, the power of the self to affect the environment is weakened in the child's consciousness.

Psychologists have long recognized the primary role that people, and parental figures in particular, have in shaping the developing self. Every theorist, from Freud to Mead, from Erikson to Piaget, emphasizes the importance of the infant's early relations with his or her caretakers as the most significant source of information from which the self emerges. It is, of course, true that the mother is the most powerful, and usually the most responsive, source of information for the newborn. Parents, siblings, and, later, peers can provide exquisitely detailed or alternatively all-inclusive feedback, if for no other reason than that the self can best be confirmed or negated by language - communication with others. To say "I love you" to someone implies a validation of his or her self that no amount of dancing mobiles can give.

Yet the impact of inanimate objects in this self-awareness process is much more important than one would infer from its neglect. Things also tell us who we are, not in words, but by embodying our intentions. In our everyday traffic of existence, we can also learn about ourselves from objects, almost as much as from people.

A good example of such an object is the ball, one of the earliest objects with which children in many cultures are confronted. Basically, a ball has a vocabulary limited to only four expressions: It can rest, fly, roll, or bounce. With these, however, incredibly eloquent messages can be composed. A baby in a playpen can formulate hundreds of intentions with a ball - squeezing, throwing, hitting, catching, and so forth. When the ball performs as the child intended, the child's self is confirmed and strengthened. Later, through a variety of games using this multipurpose object  the ball  youngsters are provided with the opportunity to confirm their selves further by learning to control its movements. In our society even grown men, such as Pelè, Kareem Abdul Jabbar, Jack Nicolaus, Minnesota Fats, or Pete Rose, have structured the self around their ability to control the trajectories of balls.

Things differ in the kind of messages they can send about the self. A doll, for instance, lends itself to nurturant behavior: It "expects" to be hugged, dressed, or lulled to sleep and is shaped to produce these behaviors, to which children readily respond. When cradling a doll, the child's action can reflect back the message: "I am someone who takes care of dolls." A toy gun has a different range of expressions; by using it as a firearm, a child learns: "I am someone who can shoot people." Of course, children at play generally know that they are pretending, yet the kind of messages they receive about themselves during play may become real components of their adult selves.

Toys are important shapers of the self in childhood and often continue in later life as symbols of different "leisure" pursuits. Golf clubs and jogging shoes and sailboats and snowmobiles are tools of self-definition for many adults. But everyday utilitarian objects also serve the same purpose of providing information about the self, and yet their effect can be so pervasive as to be difficult to discern at first glance.

The most basic information about ourselves as human beings - the fact that we are human  has been traditionally conveyed to us by the use of artifacts. Civilized people express their identity as humans by wearing clothes, cooking their food and eating with utensils, living in houses, and sleeping in beds. Those people who consider themselves "civilized" differ from those who are "primitive," mainly in terms of the variety and complexity of the things with which they interact. Not so long ago, "civilized" people also credited themselves with more intelligence, higher morality, and greater sensitivity. But such claims have turned out to be very difficult to prove. Thus often the only remaining distinction between civilized people and primitive people is the know-how of the former to boost their ego by interacting with the things that make up their world. Of course, the converse is also true  the contempt of the hunter or farmer for the burgher because the latter would not know how to use the tools of survival if removed from his urban environment.

The tools of one's trade, perhaps more than any other set of objects, help to define who we are as individuals. Karl Marx was right: Humans create their existence primarily through productive efforts. That is, for most adults the intention of producing the necessities for physical survival in accordance with a specific form of life is the most basic, requiring the greatest investment of psychic energy. Productive action reveals a great deal about the worker's ingenuity, skills, endurance, as well as his or her limitations. Thus whatever information we get about our selves from productive acts becomes a central component of the self as a whole. Smith, Carter, Miller, Weaver, Taylor  in most languages, as in English, the identity of a person was often derived from his occupation (the male pronoun here is more of a historical one rather than a sign of contemporary sexism). A "Smith" was someone who owned an anvil and knew how to forge iron with pincers and hammers, whereas a "Miller" owned large stones connected to wind or water and could grind grain. A man defined and cultivated his individuality by using the things that enabled him to exist.

The condition of women in history can also be traced to differences in their interaction with objects. Whereas men were forced by the division of labor to learn a variety of special skills related to different categories of things, women developed their selves through interaction with objects that changed little with time: Kitchen utensils, gardening tools, looms, brooms, and those things involved in raising children were the universal instruments through which female productivity was expressed. Of course, social skills arising from human interaction largely compensated for the lack of instrumental self-definition, but the resultant selves could not fail to be different in important respects. The current "emancipation" of women is also greatly the result of the sudden emergence of a whole range of previously nonexisting objects contraceptives and household appliances have considerably decreased the amount of psychic energy necessary to accomplish traditionally feminine household tasks and crafts. That is, women need not  and, in fact, no longer can  define their self exclusively with information resulting from interaction with traditional feminine objects. Thus women are free  and in essence forced to seek new things that will help them to define who they are.

In some respects, however, our emphasis on tools of production, although accurate in reflecting the long sweep of past centuries, seems somewhat obsolete as a reflection of current reality. After all, the majority of workers, those in white collar, business, and service occupations, nowadays do not use specific tools on their jobs. For more and more people, information-processing skills have taken the place of the primary productive skills dependent on material objects. The tools of the eye have displaced the tools of the hand. Things, however, have not ceased to send messages about who we are. By and large, we now define ourselves through objects of consumption rather than production. When

Veblen (1953) wrote his Theory of the Leisure Class at the turn of the century, only the rich could lead a life of leisure. But now American society as a whole resembles a leisure culture. Cars, homes, and other leisure-type equipment are some of the things that define what we can do and who we are. Moreover, the belongings that surround us in the home constitute a symbolic ecology structuring our attention and reflecting our intentions and thus serve to cultivate the individuality of the owner.

Despite the fact that so many objects are mass produced today, it is still possible to achieve some unique expression by careful selection and combination of items. A stereo system, for instance, with half a dozen major components (i.e., receiver, amplifier, speakers, turntable, tape deck, cartridge, etc.), manufactured by dozens of companies in dozens of styles, could be assembled in billions of different ways, giving ample opportunity for each person on Earth to express his or her individuality, even modestly, by choosing a system that no one else has. Perhaps this is one of the reasons that stereos are the most frequently mentioned special household objects by younger people in our sample.

## Age-related differences in the significance of objects

Age differences begin to indicate the role of objects at various points in the life cycle. Table 4.1 lists those things that at least 10 percent of respondents reported as special in each of the three generations. The three lists are quite different in a number of respects. Some differences were presented in the previous chapter: for instance, the asymmetrical preference for stereos and photos among the youngest and oldest respondents, the curvilinear relationship of preference for TV sets with age, or the importance of visual art and sculpture for the middle generation.

In general, each column of the table reflects the outline of a kind of self that develops at each of the three broad divisions of the life cycle used in this study: adolescence, parenthood, and late adulthood. The young receive meaningful information from interacting with objects that are appropriate to their stage of life, as defined in this culture; these are different objects, and therefore different selves, from those that their parents and grandparents develop.

Table.peljm lst  ntteif
<table><tr><td>Children (N = 79)</td><td>Percentage mentioned</td><td>Parents (N = 150)</td><td>Percentage mentioned</td><td>Grandparents (N = 86)</td><td>Percentage mentioned</td></tr><tr><td>1. Stereos</td><td>45.6</td><td>1. Furniture</td><td>38.1</td><td>1. Photos</td><td>37.2</td></tr><tr><td>2. TV</td><td>36.7</td><td>2. Visual art</td><td>36.7</td><td>2. Furniture</td><td>33.7</td></tr><tr><td>3. Furniture</td><td>32.9</td><td>3. Sculpture</td><td>26.7</td><td>3. Books</td><td>25.6</td></tr><tr><td>4. Musical inst.</td><td>31.6</td><td>4. Books</td><td>24.0</td><td>4. TV</td><td>23.3</td></tr><tr><td>5. Beds</td><td>29.1</td><td>5. Musical inst.</td><td>22.7</td><td>5. Visual art</td><td>22.1</td></tr><tr><td>6. Pets</td><td>24.1</td><td>6. Photos</td><td>22.0</td><td>6. Plates</td><td>22.1</td></tr><tr><td>7. Miscellaneous</td><td>20.3</td><td>7. Plants</td><td>19.3</td><td>7. Sculpture</td><td>17.4</td></tr><tr><td>8. Sports equipment</td><td>17.7</td><td>8. Stereos</td><td>18.0</td><td>8. Appliances</td><td>15.1</td></tr><tr><td>9. Collectibles</td><td>17.7</td><td>9. Appliances</td><td>17.3</td><td>. Miscellaneous</td><td>15.1</td></tr><tr><td>10. Books</td><td>15.2</td><td>10. Miscellaneous</td><td>16.7</td><td>10. Plants</td><td>12.8</td></tr><tr><td>11. Vehicles</td><td>12.7</td><td>11. Plates</td><td>14.7</td><td>11. Collectibles</td><td>11.6</td></tr><tr><td>12. Radios</td><td>11.4</td><td>12. Collectibles</td><td>12.0</td><td>12. Silverware</td><td>10.5</td></tr><tr><td>13. Refrigerators</td><td>11.4</td><td>13. TV</td><td>11.3</td><td>13. Musical inst.</td><td>10.5</td></tr><tr><td>14. Stuffed animals</td><td>11.4</td><td>14. Glass</td><td>11.3</td><td>14. Weavings</td><td>10.5</td></tr><tr><td>15. Clothes</td><td>10.1</td><td>15. Jewelry</td><td>11.3</td><td>15. Whole room</td><td>10.5</td></tr><tr><td>16. Photos</td><td>10.1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

Perhaps the simplest way of illustrating these age trends is by considering the objects in two categories: action objects and contemplation objects. These classes loosely reflect the two classical approaches to human existence outlined by Hannah Arendt: the vita activa and the vita contemplativa (Arendt, 1958). The first refers to the development of self-control through unique acts; the second, to an achievement of selfhood based on conscious reflection. At different times in the history of Western civilization, Arendt claims, one or the other of these two avenues was held to be preeminent, but either the one or the other was always held to offer the most effective means for cultivating selfhood.

The objects children cherish share a proclivity for action. Many of them are meant to invite kinetic involvement  such as musical instruments, pets, sports equipment, vehicles. Even stereos, refrigerators, and stuffed animals are instruments for doing. They require some physical manipulation to release their meaning. Grandparents, on the other hand, single out things that do not require physical interaction: photographs, books, painting, sculpture, plateware, silverware, and so on. This turn with age from action to reflection matches what we know from common sense and is also similar to what other scholars have described theoretically and empirically (i.e., Cumming and Henry, 1961; Neugarten, 1968, pp. 140-1). The middle generation represents both trends but is much closer to that of grandparents: Parents cherish musical instruments, plants, stereos  all objects of action; they also find meaning in objects of contemplation like art, books, photos, and plates. Of the children's special objects, 59 percent can be classed in the action category, compared to 29 percent of the parents' and 27 percent of the grandparents' (chi square, $\pmb { \mathscr { p } } <$ .001). Only 16 percent of the children's objects are suited for contemplation, as opposed to 45 percent of their parents' and 47 percent of the grandparents' $( \phi < . 0 0 0 1 )$ . This pattern suggests two things in addition to the obvious differences: Contemplation is relatively less valued in youth than action is in late adulthood; and parents are practically indistinguishable from grandparents in terms of the action/contemplation distinction.

But the physical characteristics of cherished objects may only give a very superficial indication of the different kind of interaction people at various stages of life have with things. Here is, for example, what a boy says about a new set of silverware he thinks is special:

They have jagged bottoms and I like them because I can make designs on the food with them. It makes it fun to eat with them 'cause you can make all kinds of neat patterns and things . . . (Without it) it would mean that I wouldn't have fun eating anymore. The food would be good, but it wouldn't be as much fun not seeing the jags going up and down and all around.

We have coded silverware an "object of contemplation," because in most cases these objects are kept in sideboards or special chests and are used  if ever - only on special occasions; their meaning usually derives from memories of past events or of relatives. But the quotation shows a youth can appropriate such an object and use it in quite a different context of meaning: It becomes a tool for self-control through kinetic action, of enjoyment derived from carrying out intentions in a direct, physical way. Thus objects that seem to be made for contemplation are often used in action by youth; and vice versa, the older generation often cherished kinetic objects, such as musical instruments or sports equipment, for the memories they evoke rather than the physical interaction they are potentially able to provide.

Normally, however, the intrinsic quality of an object lends itself to either action or contemplation. Nowhere is this specialization of meaning more evident than in the case of stereos and photos, the most often cherished objects of the youngest and oldest generation, respectively. Most children who mention a stereo value it as a means to hear their records and create moods and not for its own qualities. Photos, on the other hand, are often described as "irreplaceable" by older respondents. The qualities of the photos themselves induce moods of remembrance of particular occasions for older people. The inherent qualities of photographs and stereos also reflect the different temporal orientations of youth and the aged. A photo is completed as an object; it can take on new meanings only in contemplation, as the owner compares those present in the photo with a current situation. But a stereo can take on new meanings with each record played, because its function is to serve as a medium for music. Old meanings and identities can thus easily be discarded and new ones take their place, as a youth pleases or as the fashions dictate. Stereos and photos are thus objects well suited to induce sentimental moods, and perhaps they are so highly regarded by children and grandparents, respectively, because they can induce those moods that are appropriate to meet the inner needs of children for lively activity and of grandparents for contemplation.

Sometimes the process of social maturation is reflected by subtle differences in how persons relate to the same object. One of the few sibling pairs we interviewed consisted of a 12-year-old girl and her 15-year-old brother. Both children independently mentioned the refrigerator as being special, but for quite different reasons. The young girl said that when she felt unhappy all she had to do was go to the kitchen, open the refrigerator, and she would already feel better at the thought of fixing herself a snack. The boy, on the other hand, said that the refrigerator gave him a good feeling because when his friends came over to visit he could open it and treat them to food and drink. In the first case the meaning of the object was clearly egocentric  a tool for restoring the homeostasis of the child's moods. In the second case the meaning expands beyond the horizon of the personal self and its needs to include social bonds. The same siblings also mentioned a wrought silver sculpture made by their grandfather. The younger explained her predilection by saying that it made her feel proud to be able to show the sculpture to her friends, who usually admired it. The older said that upon seeing the sculpture he was often amazed that one of his relatives, who lived a long time ago, had been able to make something so beautiful. It is remarkable how much the range of significations of an object can expand in three years' time. The young girl uses the object to "show off," as a tool for capturing her friends' attention. The older brother is intrigued by the continuity of meaning over time; his perspective is already decentered, finding meanings relevant to the self beyond its material confines.

The differences in meaning in this example seem to support Piaget's (1967) claim that the child moves from "concrete" operations to the "formal" stage of cognitive development around this period (see Piaget, 1967; Canaan, 1976), with a corresponding decentration" of perspective. Although Piaget may be accurately describing processes of change during this period, we do not share his rather rigid separation of the "formal," or form  the "second intentional" level  from content. Indeed, one of the main purposes of our study is to explore how the most complex patterns of emotion and thought can become embodied in and symbolized by concrete things, that is, how things themselves are part of the interpretive sign process that constitutes meaning. Accordingly, the purpose of cultivation is not to achieve increasing levels of abstraction but, rather, the goal is what Peirce (1931-5) referred to as "concrete reasonableness" - the embodiment, actualization, and growth of the patterns of emotion and thoughts that comprise the self.

Table 4.. Generational effects of the distributionfmeanings associated with special objects
<table><tr><td></td><td>Children  $( N = 7 9 )$ </td><td>Parents  $( N = 1 5 0 )$ </td><td>Grandparents  $( N = { \dot { 8 6 } } )$ </td><td>Probability value of chi-square</td></tr><tr><td>Memories</td><td>48.1</td><td>82.0</td><td>83.7</td><td>.0001</td></tr><tr><td>Associations</td><td>48.1</td><td>52.7</td><td>54.7</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Experiences</td><td>91.1</td><td>86.0</td><td>81.4</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Intrinsic Qualities</td><td>53.2</td><td>70.7</td><td>55.8</td><td>.01</td></tr><tr><td>Personal Values</td><td>55.7</td><td>56.0</td><td>46.5</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Self</td><td>97.5</td><td>87.3</td><td>76.7</td><td>.0004</td></tr><tr><td>Immediate Family</td><td>70.9</td><td>85.3</td><td>86.0</td><td>.013</td></tr><tr><td>Kin</td><td>12.7</td><td>27.3</td><td>24.4</td><td>.039</td></tr><tr><td>Nonfamily</td><td>43.0</td><td>37.3</td><td>40.7</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Past</td><td>64.6</td><td>85.3</td><td>86.0</td><td>.0003</td></tr><tr><td>Present-Future</td><td>100.0</td><td>97.3</td><td>96.5</td><td>NS</td></tr></table>

Numbers represent the percentage of respondents mentioning at least one meaning in the different classes of meaning.

If one turns from the types of objects cherished by the different generations to the kinds of meanings that the objects evoke, the disparity between the age groups is again highlighted. Table 4.2 shows the relevant figures. The largest differences, as one would expect, are in terms of the great increase in Memories from childhood to adulthood and the steady decrease of Self-related meanings.

In addition, references to Immediate Family and Kin also increase with adulthood. Associations, Personal Values, and Nonfamily personal ties do not change from one age group to the other; nor does the class of meanings we have coded as Experiences. But the subcategory of Ongoing Occasions is mentioned much more often by children $( \phi < . 0 0 4 )$ , and so is Enjoyment $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } <$ .02). The same holds for objects providing a sense of Release, which is described at least once by 38 percent of the children, compared with 23 percent of parents and only 9 percent of grandparents $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 0 1 )$ . These patterns again suggest that the meaning of a cherished object tends to shift by adulthood from what one can do with it currently to what one has done with it in the past and that instead of providing information primarily about the personal self, it now speaks more about other people.

It is interesting to note that although references to the present or the future do not decline substantially with age, meanings referring to the past increase significantly from adolescence to adulthood. Besides having a past, maturity means cultivating that past, integrating former experiences - previous ways of being - into the ongoing psychic activity. For an adult, objects serve the purpose of maintaining the continuity of the self as it expands through time.

The outline that emerges from these findings is not surprising on the whole, but it allows us to see with greater clarity and detail how the self develops and is maintained across the life span. The importance of objects of action in the early years is a reminder of the powerful need children have to internalize actions and to define the limits of their selves through direct kinetic control. The internalization of the other and the experiences of our own inadequacy are extremely important for the cultivation of the self and are often painful. But intentional action producing enjoyment is also central to the evolution of the self. Enjoyment is a key factor because it serves as proof that the action is a genuine expression of the self. Therefore play, toys, and tools used in games have a central importance in the development of children.

This need for immediate, physical feedback that produces enjoyment is the main factor behind the object preferences of youth, who need it to build concrete evidence for the existence of an autonomous self. As one grows older the evidence becomes irrefutable and the doubts about one's existence, about the shape of one's self, tend to become less urgent. At this point, however, a new set of problems seems to arise whenever one attends to one's self. The issue is no longer: Who am I? What can I do? Rather: Where do I fit in? How am I related? This transition from concerns about current enjoyable experiences to enduring family ties is what the generational difterences in Table 4.2 seem to retlect. Perhaps most adults sooner or later realize that there are ways of cultivating the self other than by acting in terms of one's own intentions. It is possible to identify with a set of intentions broader than one's own, and any cultivation of these broader goals will also include the self. In other words, when parents identify with their children, they will be affected by whatever happens to the children as if it were happening directly to them. Thus, when a person identifies with his or her family, ancestors, race or culture, then all the known actions and experiences of these groups can provide feedback to the self, and the individual's self grows by making these experiences personal. Sooner or later the fragility and the limitations of a self built on individualistic intentions become painfully obvious. When this occurs, people tend to broaden the definition of the self by sharing  sometimes in actuality, sometimes vicariously  the intentions of other people, institutions, or broader purposes like those contained in a religion.

This conclusion is certainly not new. Many theorists of the life cycle have said roughly the same. The three adult "stages" envisioned by Erikson "intimacy vs. isolation," generativity vs. stagnation," and "ego identity vs. despair" - refer to this process of shifting the center of the self from one's own actions to one's position in a network of enduring relationships (Erikson, 1950). Contrary to most speculations on this subject, however, the evidence. gleaned from examining people's relationships with objects quite strongly confirms the fact that such a shift is not only intuitively true but is also empirically demonstrable.

A very immediate implication of such a developmental change concerns the physical environment of older people. For example, the possibility that older persons may see their furniture as extensions of themselves or as a personal record of their memories and experiences is often ignored. Advice issued from government agencies stresses the importance of simple, hygienic, uncluttered rooms with the bare minimum of objects and furniture; and the managements of many residences for the aged appear to have implemented this suggestion. For example, gerontologists give the following advice for older people about to be relocated:

FURNISHINGS AND THE USE OF SPACE - Setup and placing of furniture appeared unfavorable in the majority of apartments. Many flats were crowded with old and bulky furniture . . . Counseling on setup and furnishing is desirable before the aged move into their new apartments. (Rosenmayr and Köckeis, 1966, p.42)

From this viewpoint furniture is seen only in terms of its physical function, not as a culturally defined "frame" (Goffman, 1974) for structuring the experiential living space, thereby missing its importance as a means of establishing a sense of personal continuity and meaning in an otherwise impersonal environment. Yet if, as we have argued, the self of mature adults tends to be structured around networks of past and present relationships, which are often embodied in concrete objects, then depriving an older person of such objects might involve the destruction of his or her self. A recent study with institutionalized older persons seems to bear out our argument (Sherman and Newman, 1977-8).

The importance of objects for the normal development of young children has been recognized in the past two decades. From this an active effort to enrich the infant's environment has followed; cribs now fairly bristle with kinetic toys. A similar awareness might be in order to preserve the richness of stimulation for the elderly; at the very least, objects that signify the expanded boundary of their selves should be preserved.

This does not mean, of course, that all older persons should be encouraged to live surrounded by bric-a-brac and ancient furniture. In this respect the needs of the elderly are as diverse as those of younger people. Some older respondents stated quite convincingly that none of the objects they owned meant an awful lot to them or that only some photos were irreplaceable. But for others certain things - a bed, a refrigerator, a set of china  were vivid ties with a way of being that could not be changed without serious consequences. It is not just the objects themselves but also the meanings that sustain one's life that are at issue. If these are made concrete in objects, as they often are, then one should have sensitivity and respect for the material signs that carry such an essential burden.

Two women, living on different floors of the same high-rise dwelling, illustrate drastically different patterns of transaction with objects. Both were widows living alone, past their eightieth birthday. Their health and income were about the same. The two apartments were identical, and the complement of objects and furniture in their homes was also quite similar. When asked which objects were special, the first woman could not think of any answers. The things she owned were useful and nice, she said, but there was nothing more to tell about them. Finally, she remembered something that was special: a custom-made shower attachment in the bathroom, a gift from her daughter. The reason it was special was that the spray gave her a massage that relaxed her. When asked the same question the second woman had difficulty in knowing where to begin: She had dozens of objects that she was eager to discuss. Her daughter's handiwork was preserved in a wallhanging and plants; her grandchildren's photos and drawings were throughout the place, and the cupboards contained china and silver whose dates and provenance were carefully remembered. The bathroom cabinet still held her husband's shaving kit, 25 years after his death  a relic she attended to each day. In fact, the bathroom alone contained three special objects: besides the shaving kit there was an old rug cherished as an heirloom and a plant that had grown from one of her daughter's cuttings.

Our argument would be so much more convincing if we could say that these different patterns of interactions are related to other measurable differences in the way these two women have adapted to their lives; if, for instance, we could say that the first was barely able to cope with old age, was alienated and unhappy, whereas the second led a serene and happy existence. But both women seemed to be fairly contented, equally active and involved, and well adapted to their environment. It is doubtful that any psychological test would have shown great signs of stress or maladjustment in the former and not in the latter.

Thus the significance of the different patterns of object relations shown by these two women can be evaluated in one of two ways: either one dismisses the importance of the difference because it seems to have no overt behavioral correlates (i.e., the two women are in other respects similar) or one takes the difference seriously, as a datum that is significant in itself even without any observable side effects. Suppose we take the second course; then what do we learn if we ask: What is the significance of the difference between the two women?

The first one lives in a world to which she is well adjusted; she can draw sustenance and comfort from it. The objects she owns keep her warm, well fed, and relaxed. The intentions in which she invests psychic energy tend to be fulfilled, as far as such things can be, and so her sense of self is sturdy and resilient. Compared to the second woman, however, a whole dimension of experience seems to be so atrophied that it is missing  that of the experience of being part of goals larger than herself. There is nothing mystical, or metaphorical, about such an experience. The personal self emerges out of feedback to intentional actions; similarly, the self that includes a larger whole emerges out of feedback to actions motivated by the goals of a collectivity. For instance, if I invest psychic energy in the intention to make my company prosper (as opposed to simply making more money for myself), then any vicissitude of the company, even if it does not affect my salary, will have a direct effect on my self. We can discuss this investment of psychic energy as a transaction between my personal self and the larger "self" of the corporation. For if a self is an ordered pattern of psychic activity and not just the physical material of the body per se, then surely a corporation, like any other social system that has a continuous existence irrespective of that of its particular members, has a kind of "self" or "personality." The second woman in this case differs from the first in that her home environment reflects an expanded boundary of the self, one that includes a number of past and present relationships. The meanings of the objects she is surrounded by are signs of her ties to this larger system of which she is a part. She is actively attached to this family system through the psychic energy allocated to the objects; whenever she attends to them, her relationships are activated in consciousness. The belongings she cherishes reflect the goal of her family, both living and dead, which motivates her daily existence.

This exegesis suggests that the two women lead significantly different lives, despite the lack of other obvious behavioral or psychological differences. Perhaps some day it will be possible to obtain independent evidence that will confirm this argument. At this point all one can say is that the inner life of two such people must be drastically different. The first seems to make her way through life alone, ordering experience in terms of her own personal goals, translating information in terms of these "self-ish" needs. The second has related her self to other persons by bonds of interaction; the intentions that direct her needs are shared with others and the information she attends to is decoded in terms of goals that transcend her own private ones. Which-kind of inner life is "better"? Which is more "adjusted"? Perhaps these questions are premature, or ultimately inappropriate. The point is to realize that one can give meaning to life in quite different ways; the choice one makes might be no more  or less  than its own reward.

## Gender-related differences in the significance of objects

In our description of how the self develops through interaction with objects, we have maintained that a person chooses which objects to cultivate and therefore the kind of self that will emerge out of the interaction. This should now be qualified. It is only to the extent that a person possesses his or her own self and is not possessed by the external forms of mind, such as a consumer culture or alienated labor, that free choice is possible. Therefore the reflecting self should experience itself as acting relatively autonomously. On the other hand, it is also true that the world of objects and meanings a person confronts is "always already" (to use the idiom dear to existential philosophers) constituted in his or her environment. What objects are available, how one should react to them and why, are issues already decided in advance by the social milieu into which one is born. Thus most people much of the time act out relationships already "scripted" by the culture, thus developing selves that fit the cultural mold. By adopting the intentions pervading his or her culture, a person does not feel determined or coerced; usually he or she goes about building the self unquestioningly, doing "what comes naturally." Thus, by a process whose beautiful inevitability recalls that of a cell duplicating and differentiating itself into a complex organism, the self through its own seemingly autonomous choices replicates the order of its culture and so becomes a part of that order and a means for its further replication.

Cultural scripts, however, never ascribe the same roles to each member of society. Every category of people is limited in what it can do, and therefore can be; but some are more limited than others. One of the most universal differences between roles is the one ascribed to gender. Sex role differences are often explained in terms of two contrary viewpoints: the functional and the conflict perspective. The first assumes that structural differences in a social system are adaptive for the whole as well as for its parts, thus the different expectations shaping men and women in a given society is the result of a mutually beneficial division of tasks and responsibilities. The second starts from the premise that inequalities always benefit some person or class of persons at the expense of others; therefore gender differences are the result of males having imposed their own interests on females and trying to preserve their advantage.

As is usual with the extreme positions of a dialectic, both have merit, but their synthesis involves a painstakingly complex weighing of factors. The relevance of the argument in this context is that, as one might expect, men and women in our sample display different patterns of relationships with objects (see Table 4.3).

Males mention significantly more TV, stereo sets, sports equipment, vehicles, and trophies. Females more often mention photographs, sculpture, plants, plates, glass, and textiles - all with a frequency that is significant at least at the .005 level of probability. This means that males cherish objects of action more frequently (44 percent vs. 30 percent for females; $\begin{array} { r } { p < . 0 0 1 ) } \end{array}$ , whereas women prefer objects of contemplation (45 percent vs. 29 percent for men; ${ p < . 0 0 0 1 } )$ . The female pattern is closer to that of the grandparents, whereas the male, resembles that of the children. A similar trend obtains for the meanings that the objects evoke. Women give reasons referring to Memories, Associations, and Immediate Family significantly more often than men do.

These differences reflect, at the level of symbolic household objects, the distinction sociologists have made between instrumental male roles and expressive female roles. What they further indicate is that these distinctions not only involve the behavior society expects from sex roles but also permeate the most intimate symbolic environment people create to give meaning to their lives. Men not only act in accordance to masculine stereotypes; they also respond to things around them in terms of appropriate masculine scripts when they supposedly choose freely for themselves. In other words, the selves of men and women represent different sets of intentions or habits of consciousness: They pay attention to different things in the same environment and even value the same things for quite different reasons.

The distinction between objects of action and of contemplation, which shows such a difference between the sexes, barely begins to tell the story. The meanings given by men are usually very different from those given by women, even when they refer to the same object. For instance, plants were coded as "objects of action," because in fact their meaning arises out of the physical care devoted to them. They are the most numerous objects of action mentioned by women. Yet the "action" plants represent is hardly the same action that males usually talk about. We have seen in the last chapter how plants refer mainly to the slow, growth-producing nurturance and life-giving concern that has been the classic symbol of womanhood.

Table 4.3. Most frequently named objects mentioned by each sex
<table><tr><td>Males (N = 141)</td><td>Females Percentage (N = 174)</td><td></td><td>Percentage</td></tr><tr><td>1. Furniture</td><td>32.6a</td><td>1. Furniture</td><td>38.5</td></tr><tr><td>2. TV</td><td>29.1</td><td>2. Photographs</td><td>30.5</td></tr><tr><td>3. Stereos</td><td>28.4</td><td>3. Visual art</td><td>27.0</td></tr><tr><td> Visual art</td><td>24.1</td><td>4. Sculpture</td><td>25.9</td></tr><tr><td>5. Musical instruments</td><td>20.6</td><td>5. Books</td><td>24.1</td></tr><tr><td>6. Books</td><td>19.9</td><td>6. Plants</td><td>23.0</td></tr><tr><td>7. Sports equipment</td><td>17.7</td><td>7. Musical instruments</td><td>22.4</td></tr><tr><td>8. Collectibles</td><td>14.9</td><td>8. Plates</td><td>20.1</td></tr><tr><td>9. Photographs</td><td>14.2</td><td>9. Appliances</td><td>16.7</td></tr><tr><td>10. Beds</td><td>12.1</td><td>10. Stereos</td><td>16.1</td></tr><tr><td>11. Pets</td><td>11.3</td><td>11. Beds</td><td>14.9</td></tr><tr><td>12. Sculpture</td><td>10.6</td><td>12. TV</td><td>14.4</td></tr><tr><td>13. Vehicles</td><td>9.9</td><td>13. Glass</td><td>12.8</td></tr><tr><td>14. Appliances</td><td>9.9</td><td>14. Textiles</td><td>12.6</td></tr><tr><td>15. Trophies</td><td>8.5</td><td>15. Collectibles</td><td>12.1</td></tr></table>

aPercentage of respondents mentioning at least one object in each category.

For men, action usually means exertion toward a goal of physical and mental supremacy. The active pursuits of women are often motivated by intentions that are broader than the self defined by its physical limits, whereas those of men tend toward the expression of individual intentionality. For men, objects often point outside the home, but the connection is rarely that of a part to a whole, as with women and the elderly. Instead, the object connects different aspects of the person's self: the family man with the professional man and the man of leisure. Here is a father describing why the fireplace in his home is special:

For a lot of psychological reasons that I've never much thought of but it's just I enjoy a fire just like I enjoy being next to a lake or a river or an ocean. To the extent that a fire is warming and comforting and we do a lot of camping outside, mountain climbing, hiking, and a fire is a comforting phenomenon in those circumstances so inside the house it's also this way. It's comforting and attractive and a physically beautiful thing as well.

This quotation illustrates an interesting symbolic inversion. Although the fireplace is traditionally a symbol of the home, this man uses it for exactly the opposite reason: to represent the great outdoors inside. The home and the arena of wilderness action are related by the comforting warmth of the fire, a sign common to both. The same man comments on the significance of climbing equipment in his three sons' bedroom:

I love climbing and therefore I am an appreciator of the equipment . . . To be completely without it would be like cutting off an arm. I am just attuned to climbing in the outdoors and to the shape that you have to be in to do it and the whole thing and it's very important.

For this man the equipment represents, among other things, "the shape that you have to be in"  in other words, one of the physical shapes of the self he had developed through the action system of climbing.

Here is another, a policeman, for whom the most special objects were a brace of handguns kept in the bedroom. In this case we have one of those by now rare instances when a man owns the tools of his trade:

Well, they are my working tools, they save my life, you know, at least give me the feeling that they will. I like to take real good care of them, keep them up, keep them oiled, and so on. They are my living to an extent . . . (Without them) that would mean that I wouldn't be able to work . . . They would be a matter of survival and guns to a policeman are like a horse to a jockey, you got to get used to them, work them a lot, know what they are capable of, know their strength and weaknesses, how it does what it does, every gun is different. A gun is not just something that makes a loud noise. The policeman who knows his job, he knows his gun too, so with a new gun it takes a lot of breaking in. So I would sure hate to have to break in a bunch of new guns . . . It would be a lot of trouble if I didn't have my guns, the ones I know.

This is an almost lyrical illustration of how closely the identity of a person can become enmeshed with his instruments of production. Here the symbolic elements are almost absent at the overt level, but the whole sequence is a symphony of symbolic references to the man's survival, his skills, his responsibilities  in fact, to his self as a worker. (Parenthetically, there were not many other visible dimensions to the self of this man, judging by the rest of the interview. The only other objects he mentioned were a stereo because it allowed him to get relaxed after a rough day's work and a topaz ring that his family bought him, because "it's got a lot of sentimental value in addition to being a piece of topaz.")

Other tools, even when not actually tools of the trade, are often central to a man's identity as homo faber. Here is a tool-and-die maker whose main hobby is to build and fly model airplanes. He feels most at home in the basement where his tools are and where he says he has the "most control over the environment." These tools allow him to express what is most uniquely individual about his self. The lathe, for example, enables him to build and modify planes that he flies in competitions:

I got it to learn about my business. But then I found out I enjoyed it, because you can fashion things within a thousandth of an inch. It's a very fine instrument . . . It also ties in nicely with the model airplane hobby — there are certain things I can make or fashion. It's doing something with my hands which I enjoy . . . (Without it) . . . It's certainly not one of those things that's necessary for survival. But I'm sure it's important to me. I had a dream that the house was on fire. And I don't know if my wife and kids got out, but I was down in the basement, frantically trying to dismember the lathe, and get it out, piece by piece. It's a very special tool . . . I feel very fortunate to have it.

For this man the lathe is not "necessary for survival," as the guns were for the policeman. Yet in another sense it is a necessary tool to fashion a particular identity. The information the lathe provides, with its infinitesimal tolerance for error, is crucial for building the owner's self - so crucial, in fact, that in his dream this symbol and instrument of the self takes precedence over wife and children.

Another man mentions a power saw, which he jokingly claimed to have bought for his wife for Mother's Day:

I never had power tools except for a drill, and as I said, I like building things . . . We really bought the saw to build the solar panels on the roof, so it's really a promise to ourselves that, when we get some money, we'll build it.

The same man also discussed a calculator:

I was doing a lot of statistical work for my degree at Northwestern. I like math, especially statistics. Also, I spend hours designing my solar collector . . . I like to play around.

Play, pleasure, and enjoyment derived from the challenges of professional roles are represented by many of the adult men's cherished objects, giving their responses a more diversified, more spacious, more adventurous tone than those received from women. The latter's concerns, as we have seen, are more narrowly focused on the crucial human ties that give life its continuity: on parents and children, on those family occasions that restructure the network of relationships, like marriages, births, graduations, portentous events in the history of the tribe.

However, here we need to keep two levels of analysis separate. On the one hand, males as a group show a much more diversified sphere of action than females as a whole do. On the other hand, each individual male, although perhaps showing a specialized involvement with a particular set of objects, does not necessarily have a more diversified field of interaction than his sister or wife. In fact, at the individual level the relationship might well be reversed. When considering the complexity of most women's social networks, as well as the other interactions in which she is involved, the average individual woman might have a more varied self than her companion has.

As already noted, the complexity of self-definitions that the male role allows in American culture is often at the expense of a fragile individualism. The effigy of isolation is stamped on the other side of the coin of uniqueness. For this reason these men often seem inordinately dependent on outside recognition of their accomplishments: Having invested most of their energy in achieving autonomous goals, they need other people's recognition to ensure them of the validity of those goals  for instance, the relative importance of trophies for males. A man whose special possessions include six photos of himself receiving a cup and other symbols of accomplishment from officers of the company he has been working for says, "These are my titles, my honors. They are for other people  so you'll know I was somebody. For you, not me. They show I'm important."

Sometimes the self represented by signs for men resembles the prankster of primitive mythology, the unsocialized child of libido straining to get out of playing the role provided by the culture. Perhaps because of greater demands for constricting specialization, or because of weaker ties to the societal network, men much more often assert this side of their selves.

Here is the same man we just quoted, explaining why a marlin mounted over the fireplace was special:

My wife caught it in the Barbados; it was a crazy trip we had, filled with love and fun. If one of the children broke it, it's death. It would be gone. We want it to last, because of its bittersweet memories. I managed to get fractured on that trip. I like to gamble, fish, play golf. I was deeply into alcoholism at that time. Had a brawl in a bar in the Barbados and fractured my shoulder. Took no pills for the pain because they would have interfered with the drinking.

Bittersweet indeed  the quote starts on an idyllic tone of fond conjugal memories, but it soon disintegrates into pure Hemingway macho. In the protocols of many men this tone crops up quite unexpectedly. The patterns of meaning men carve out of the home environment is unlike that of women because they often value different experiences and learn to choose different types of belongings to objectify these experiences. Tangible evidence of prowess, such as sports equipment or trophies - or perhaps even vehicles  are cultivated by men as a cherished feature of the "paraphernalia of life" (Veblen, 1953, p.30). But the paraphernalia that women value is more likely to give testimony to domesticity itself. The feelings and thoughts one has in taking care of plants, for example, are bound to be different from those involved in the use of sports equipment. Likewise, the craft involved in making textiles and weavings (some of which were made by the respondent herself), is distinct from the crafts of athletics usually employed in the achievements of trophies.

The gender-related differences we have reviewed here can be explained in other ways than by recourse to different cultural scripts for men and women. Sociobiologists would point out that the propensity to wander afar, to take chances, to be restless, to be concerned with competition and production characterizes males in most cultures and in most animal species. By contrast, female animals tend to stay put, to be concerned with reproduction and relationships. This specialization of behavior across sexually dimorphous species strongly suggests an adaptive strategy to natural and social selection pressures operating in the environment.

It is true that, by and large, the selves of men and women are built along the lines of ancient themes, which may have at one time reflected a differentiation of roles that was convenient for adaptation. In a hunting economy, where procreation and child care tended to confine women to the hearth while propelling men in search of game, it made sense for men and women to cultivate different goals emphasizing the actions and experiences that made up their being. Now that the existence of men and women is no longer limited by the same conditions, it is remarkable how influential sex-stereotyped goals still remain. Even more striking are the dazzling variations that people play on these ancient themes and the genuinely new directions that their goals may take. As Clifford Geertz has justly noted, what is universal in humans does not give us a cue to humanity. It is the cultural peculiarities and individual idiosyncrasies that define what men and women are (Geertz, 1973). The gross gender-related differences we share with primates and other living organisms are part of who we are, like the chemicals we share with the inorganic world are part of our bodies. This inheritance still influences our actions and even our consciousness. But what is most interesting about people are the unexpected forms in which the raw material of this inheritance is shaped.

## The two dialectics

The relationship between people and objects reveals two major dimensions of organization: one that runs from action to contemplation; the other, from self to others. The first pole of these pairs typifies young people's relations with objects, the second pole is characteristic of older respondents. Meaning for the young seems to arise from active involvement with objects that define the boundaries of the self; for adults, it tends to follow from a more passive involvement with things that expand the boundaries of the self to include relationships with other people. Similarly, males emphasize action and self in contrast to women who value contemplation and relationships with others.

In addition, Memories seem to perform a self-maintenance function for older respondents. When a woman attends to a chair in which she has nursed her children long ago, or when a man looks at a trombone he played in college, the past experiences that used to define the selves of these people are again activated and recreated in the present. Thus memories serve to integrate the various patterns around which the self is organized at different points in time. One would expect that, other things being equal, the longer a person lives, the more important this becomes to ensure the integrity of the self.

But our data reveal that these two main dimensions of meaning, one based on the self-other polarity, the other on action-contemplation, are not simply characteristics of different stages of the life cycle. What we find is that within each generation some people cultivate objects in terms of memories, others in terms of experiences; some emphasize references to self, others to the family. Although it is true that differentiation (or concern with personal self) as well as an action orientation are much stronger among youth, and integration as well as a contemplative attitude are characteristic of older respondents, it is also true that the two dimensions vary among younger as well as among older people.

To illustrate this trend, one might refer to the pattern of correlations between the proportion of Memory and Experience reasons given by individual respondents for why they considered objects special, within the three generational groups. These correlation coefficients were -.58, -.66, and -.66 for the three generations $( \boldsymbol { p } < . 0 0 1$ in each case). Again, this suggests that differentiation and integration are more or less exclusive strategies of individual adaptation: One either stresses meanings relevant to the self, or to one's kin, but usually not both.

The cross-correlation of the two dimensions also results in predictable patterns: Stress on the Self goes with absence of Memories (−.57, -.55, −.58), whereas stress on the Family tends to exclude references to Experiences (−.33, −.34, -.47). Apparently, the axes of differentiation versus integration and activity versus contemplation act as organizing principles for the meaning structures people build for themselves. Although differentiation and activity are typical of youth, there are young people who find meaning in integration and contemplation; the reverse being true for adults.

The ideal balance in the development of the self would involve an equal progress in the processes of differentiation and integration. But the data suggest that instead of being in a dialectic relationship, the two processes might be in practice dichotomous: People either cultivate their selves by developing signs of individuality or by stressing signs of relatedness.

This dichotomy in the meanings conveyed by objects is clearly illustrated in Table 4.4, which reports the frequency with which different objects carried significations relevant to the Self and Others and to Memories and Experiences.

Table 4.4 shows how specialized the major object categories are in providing information about meanings that bear on the differentiation  integration dimensions. Television and stereo sets, plants, books, beds, and musical instruments are primarily signs of differentiation; that is, they refer to the individual self. On the other hand, photos, visual art, sculpture, and furniture are primarily signs of integration because they provide meanings that stress the relationships with other people. The table also shows that the same objects that serve to carry meanings about the Self also refer to Experiences, whereas the objects that specialize in integration refer to Memories.

## Shared meanings within the family

To what extent are the meanings derived from transactions with objects shared by members of families? Answering this question is difficult because of various factors. First, families vary a great deal in terms of how similarly they relate to their domestic environment. In some families, despite generational differences, every member mentions the same categories of objects and the same classes of meanings. Other families seem to live in homes that contain very different symbolic dimensions; in these, each member relates to an exclusive set of objects for reasons that are not shared with the other members. This diversity suggests that families could be studied in terms of their internal symbolic differentiation and integration, a task with exciting possibilities but beyond the scope of the present inquiry.

The second factor is the sheer number of relationships involved. For each object or meaning category there are 15 relationships one could look at: that between male children and their fathers, their mothers, their grandfathers, and so on. Instead of burdening the reader with a multitude of correlation matrices, we shall show only the pattern relating to the action-contemplation dimension.

Table 4.5 answers two questions: Do people in the same nuclear family find the same objects special when they are classified according to the action-contemplation distinction? And, if one member of the family emphasizes either Experiences or Memories, is it likely that the other members will also do so?

Table 4.4. Percentage of various objects having meanings referring to Self, Others, Experiences, and Memories
<table><tr><td>No.a Self</td><td>%</td><td>Other People</td><td>%</td><td>Experiences</td><td>%</td><td>Memories</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>1. Television</td><td>34</td><td>Photos</td><td>33</td><td>Television</td><td>32</td><td>Photos</td><td>27</td></tr><tr><td>2. Stereos</td><td>32</td><td>Visual art</td><td>29</td><td>Stereos</td><td>28</td><td>Sculpture</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>3. Beds</td><td>25</td><td>Furniture</td><td>22</td><td>Beds</td><td>22</td><td>Visual art</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>4. Musical instr.</td><td>24</td><td>Sculpture</td><td>22</td><td>Musical instr.</td><td>22</td><td>Furniture</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>5. Books</td><td>23</td><td>Musical instr.</td><td>20</td><td>Plants</td><td>21</td><td>Collectibles</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>6. Plants</td><td>23</td><td>Beds</td><td>18</td><td>Books</td><td>19</td><td>Books</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>7. Collectibles</td><td>18</td><td>Collectibles</td><td>16</td><td>Collectibles</td><td>14</td><td>Musical instr.</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>8. Furniture</td><td>17</td><td>Stereos</td><td>13</td><td>Furniture</td><td>11</td><td>Beds</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>9. Sculpture</td><td>12</td><td>Television</td><td>13</td><td>Photos</td><td>9</td><td>Stereos</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>10. Visual art</td><td>10</td><td>Books</td><td>13</td><td>Sculpture</td><td>9</td><td>Plants</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>11. Photos</td><td>7</td><td>Plants</td><td>11</td><td>Visual art</td><td>9</td><td>Television</td><td>0</td></tr></table>

In numerical order of significance.

Table 4.5. Relationship between family members' percentage of responses falling in special object and meaning classes, using the action-contemplation distinction
<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="5">Pairs correlated</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Fathers &amp; mothers  $( N = 7 2 )$ </td><td>Boys &amp; fathers  $( N = 4 3 )$ </td><td>Girls &amp; fathers  $( N = 2 4 )$ </td><td>Boys &amp; mothers  $( N = 5 1 )$ </td><td>Girls &amp; mothers  $\mathbf { ( } N \mathbf { \textbf { = } } 3 3 )$ </td></tr><tr><td>Types of objects</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>mentioned as special Action</td><td>.316</td><td>.18</td><td>.26</td><td>.11</td><td>.47b</td></tr><tr><td>Contemplation</td><td>.23a</td><td>-.02</td><td>.27</td><td>.10</td><td>.27a</td></tr><tr><td>Type of meanings</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Experience</td><td>.03</td><td>.20</td><td>.14</td><td>.04</td><td>.26</td></tr><tr><td>Memories</td><td>.12</td><td>.39b</td><td>.53b</td><td>.25</td><td>.43</td></tr></table>

ap < .05  
bp <.01

What the results suggest is as follows. Parents tend to share an interest in the same types of objects but not necessarily for the same reasons. If a husband mentions more action objects, chances are his wife will also do so. But if the husband stresses the meaning of experiences, this will not give us a cue as to what meaning the wife will stress. It is as if marriage socializes the spouses to share an interest in the same objects; but at the deeper level, there is no agreement about what the objects mean.

The table also quite strongly suggests that mothers pass on their meaning system to their daughters but not to their sons. Perhaps this pattern reflects the greater stability of the self women typically develop in our culture. We had seen before that as a group women tended to have a narrower focus of interest centered around traditional nurturant and interpersonal roles. Males, although individually often narrower in the scope of their interest than females, as a group showed a greater variety of specialized interests. These differences were interpreted as gender-specific paths in the development of the self. Here we see that women pattern their interaction with objects, and the meanings derived from them, on their mothers — a process that is congruent with the more conservative role that females have traditionally assumed in our culture.

Fathers and sons do not share interest in similar kinds of objects like mothers and daughters do, but fathers appear to socialize their children rather effectively in terms of integrative meanings. If a father prizes memories, both his sons and daughters are likely to do so. Table 4.5 also confirms the differentiating nature of experiences and the integrating aspect of memories. Although the Experiences class shows no significant relationship between any of the pairs within the nuclear family, the Memories class shows some substantial correlations. In other words, when meaning results from what one does, it tends to be personal; when it results from something that happened in the past, it tends to be shared.

Of course, the preceding patterns are just the ones that show through the sample as a whole. As mentioned earlier, families differ greatly in terms of what objects or meanings are shared. In some families there is a strong similarity between fathers and sons, in others, between sons and mothers; sometimes the whole family shares the same objects and meanings, sometimes no one in the family does. What does cut through these differences is the particularly strong relationship between the meaning system of mothers and daughters, the agreement between spouses on special objects but not on meanings, and the fathers' impact on their children as far as the salience of memories are concerned.

These explorations of how people interact with objects help to illuminate the process by which we become human. In the first years of life the most relevant information attesting the existence of the self consists in kinetic feedback. A child proves his or her existence as an autonomous entity by forming intentions about actions that have a clear effect on the environment: by moving things, throwing things, and breaking things; by running, jumping, and catching. These gross actions provide the clearest evidence that there is an agent capable of having an effect. The more improbable the action, the more it goes against the laws of random chance, the more it defies entropy, the clearer the message that there is a self here that does make a difference. When a girl hopping on one foot throws a ball against the wall, claps her hands twice, and then catches the ball on the rebound, she demonstrates through this strange ritual how much she is in control of randomness. Defying gravity and other inertial laws, she can make things move in highly improbable trajectories, thereby forcing one to conclude that there is a goal-directed force in action. That force is the self.

Hence we have in early life the importance of things that are capable of expressing action. Toys, sports equipment, and vehicles are obvious tools of self-development for children. But even furniture is used by children in an active, kinetic mode: A good chair is one that can be moved, turned over, climbed on; a good bed is one that can be bounced or jumped on. Even silverware, as we have seen earlier, lends itself to active expression and hence validation of the self.

By late adolescence, kinetic information generally becomes redundant  that is, the growing person already knows that he or she can control the body and its environment in predictable ways. Of course, athletics, dance or acting provide further opportunities to expand the boundaries of the self through action. But for the majority of young people a new set of challenges becomes preeminent: the control of impulses and emotions. Just as in earlier years mastery over motion proved the existence of a relatively autonomous self, for the teenager mastery over the inner states of the information-processing system itself is the paramount task of cultivation. A self that is carried away by feelings of loneliness, anxiety, or stress is not autonomous, it cannot control its own activity because it is determined by outside influences. One must become "captain of one's soul"  this is often accomplished by becoming "cool," which is the easiest way of showing one's self-control or independence of outside forces.

Adolescents find interaction with stereos, television, and musical instruments important. These tools allow teenagers to modulate their emotions - to become happy when they feel sad, to relax when they are worried. Music and television provide already structured emotional states, from comedy to romance, from violence to soothing sameness. Just as the early kinetic objects help children to define their selves through physical action, these later objects help adolescents to solidify their selves through control of their psychic processes. The amount of emotional or intellectual growth derived from interaction with these objects will depend to a great degree on what purposes can be imparted by the object and cultivated by the adolescent.

Later in life, cultivation of the self follows more and more specialized blueprints. This is especially true for men in this sample, whose identity depends to a great extent on the mastery of narrow occupational skills defined by cultural custom and social needs. An adult man grows to be a person by using the tools of his trade, giving him more individuality. More and more, however, discretionary activities in the leisure sphere also help to define the sort of person a man is. Things that one uses in work or leisure continue to provide messages about the identity of the actor.

Adult women seem to derive their sense of self less from specialized roles and more from a generalized, traditional set of actions. Caring for people and preserving and nurturing relationships are still the tasks that are most valued by the women we studied. Therefore they prefer to interact with objects that act as tools for carrying out such activities. The things they cherish are signs of ties that bind the family together  shared experiences. The self of women is built less around skills that attest to mastery over physical patterns of energy and more around skills that order the psychic activity of others. The question here, of course, is: Do these stereotypes allow the person to realize his or her potentials. What is interesting is that many mothers in this sample also worked outside the home, yet the objects that meant the most to them were more often those signifying the traditional role of mother. This suggests that there may be multiple ways to define the self. Or it may suggest that, despite the influences of women's liberation, which has made changes in the public sphere, there is still a rigid separation of roles within the home.

What is more important, however, is that by adulthood an entirely different pattern of self-definition becomes possible. As we have seen, the self begins to emerge from cultivation of kinetic interactions. Through mastery over its environment, the developing self differentiates itself as a unique, seemingly autonomous agent. But by adulthood a new process for establishing the self is increasingly used. This consists of integration, which is the result of investing psychic energy in goals that are the result of other people's intentions. One still preserves one's own intentionality, but now it is increasingly directed toward others. Differentiation is the result of control, whereas integration is based on participation. Both are ways of expanding the effectiveness of the self, but the first does it by imposing on information an order established internally, whereas the second uses psychic energy to relate the self to patterns of order external to itself.

Why this transition? It is almost certain that differentiation is a necessary first step in the evolution of the self. But it also seems true that sooner or later most people feel that the individualized entity they have become is not a viable state in the long run. When all of one's energy is invested in personal goals, then by definition one is in potential conflict with the goals of everyone else. Perhaps more to the point, given the fact that our physical system will eventually disintegrate, if all our psychic energy is tied to individual goals, the order achieved by these goals will also dissolve. The differentiated self is vulnerable and impermanent  a transient pattern of order in the flux of chaos.

Therefore cultivating broader goals, more permanent forms of order, is more attractive. By paying attention to the intentions of others, to the goals of larger systems, one "buys into" a self that transcends the fragile differentiated individual. Thus as one grows older, the signs of integration tend to become more highly valued and consequently attract more attention: Objects that stand for memories, relationships, family, and values become more prominent. In later life, possessions that represent belonging occupy center stage.

Although these phases in the interaction people have with objects more or less accurately reflect life cycle changes, the data also suggest considerable individual variation. We have seen that even in childhood some persons experiment with selves based on integration and that there are some older people who seem to have no psychic energy invested in systems that transcend personal goals. In fact, differentiation and integration appear to be, to a certain extent, mutually exclusive strategies for organizing the self. The family milieu helps to establish which of these principles will be used; as we have seen, a concern for contemplation as an alternative to action is shared by parents and their children.

Our data also suggest that the transpersonal goals into which people invest attention tend to be rather "primitive" in the sense that they include close kin, ancestors, and descendants in preference to some larger, more universal body. The strongest ties that the self establishes are still to relatives, not to abstract principles, institutions, or groups. This is true especially of women and older people of both sexes; even middle-aged men show little evidence of integration with systems beyond the ascriptive kin network.

It is possible that this has always been so and that we have overestimated the importance that religious, political, or cultural goals have played in the lives of people in the past. Or perhaps we are witnessing a return to a concern with goals shared with people close to oneself, a turning away from participation with larger systems. Perhaps in our society we have become disillusioned with the possibility of merging personal goals with those of a broader community; perhaps we have learned that religion and politics are fragile and impermanent and no new order has emerged to take their place; thus we have turned back to goals closer to home.
