> 来源：The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton)\The Meaning of Things Domestic Symbols and the Self (Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Eugene Halton).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## CHAPTER 5 The home as symbolic environment

Few English words are filled with the emotional meaning of the word "home." It brings to mind one's childhood, the roots of one's being, the security of a private enclave where one can be free and in control of one's life. The idea of home seems to express such basic and universal human needs that it comes as a surprise to realize that many other European languages have no words with the same connotations. In Italian, for instance, casa is the nearest equivalent, yet it is much closer in meaning to "house" than to "home." The same is even truer of the French maison, and by the time one gets to the Hungarian ház, the references are almost exclusively to the physical structure rather than to the emotional space. Of course, lexicality is not a sure indication of the psychological significance of a concept. Yet the availability of a word with shared meaning makes it easier to experience that meaning in everyday life. In all langauges there are circumlocutions that convey the psychological meaning of "home," but these are often somehow awkward and not commonly used. The Italian "focolare," literally "hearth," or "fireplace," is the closest poetic metonym, but it is practically never used in speech. The Hungarian otthon, meaning loosely "place of origin," is more commonly used in the same sense as the French chez nous, but neither one has the concreteness and the wide-ranging content of "home."

It would be tempting to attribute the preeminence of this concept to the Old Norse and Teutonic origins of the word, which originally connoted both a safe place and the whole world. Perhaps people of northern cultures, hemmed in by long winters, developed a stronger attachment to their shelters. But, of course, such an explanation is not tenable: The Eskimos, the Indians of the North American forests, the nomads of the steppes of Central

Asia had no permanent homes. On the other hand, among the Romans, domus had many of the connotations of "home," and in southern France, in the Middle Ages, one finds the concept as strong as it can ever be:

This basic cell was none other than the peasant family, embodied in the permanence of a house . . . In local language this entity was called an ostal . . . in Latin . . . hospicium, or, more often, a domus. It should be noted that the words, ostal, domus and hospicium all and inextricably mean both family and house. The term familia . . . never crosses the lips of the inhabitants . . . for whom the family of flesh and blood and the house of wood, stone or daub were one and the same thing. (LeRoy Ladurie, 1979, p. 24)

One might conclude, therefore, that this apparently universal human concept is in fact one of those cultural variables that is more or less freely invented at certain places at certain times and abandoned elsewhere. This conclusion seems to contradict the implications of modern ethology. Recent writers have popularized the notion that territoriality is one of the most basic needs among animals including man (Ardrey, 1966). But animals display just as much variability in their concern for territory as humans do. Although solitary wasps have private nests and permanent sleeping places (Portmann, 1961; Richards, 1961), and savannah baboons tend to sleep on the same branches of the same tree night after night (Altmann, 1980), there are also many species that do not show preferences for a personal niche in which to withdraw. Whether or not an animal becomes attached to a particular location depends on its overall strategy of adaptation to its environment. Animals whose food supply is widely scattered and unpredictable, for instance, cannot be tied down to a particular place and show no special interest in territorial defense (Harvey and Greene, in press). Among humans, adaptive strategies are particularly flexible, because they are shaped not primarily by genetic and environmental determining conditions but by symbolic forces whose purposes almost always extend beyond mere adaptation. The extent to which the physical environment is elaborated with communicative signs that reveal the specific characteristics of the inhabitants is, with language, one of the distinguishing features of human life. Although we live in physical environments, we create cultural environments within them. We continually personalize and humanize the given environment as a way of both adapting to it and creating order and significance. Thus the importance that the home has depends not only on survival needs (to bring up infants, to eat and sleep in comfort), on the particular economy (hunting or pastoral, farming or industrial), or on the climate; it also depends on values, tradition, and literary and religious associations that cannot be predicted from determining conditions.

Conceivably, humans could adapt to a way of life in which the sheltering function of a home was provided by a different structural arrangement, less wasteful of material resources than are current individual family dwellings. Although such an adaptation is possible, in the present cultural milieu it is not very realistic. As we shall see, a home is much more than a shelter; it is a world in which a person can create a material environment that embodies what he or she considers significant. In this sense the home becomes the most powerful sign of the self of the inhabitant who dwells within.

As a 63-year-old respondent told us, "I'd say my home is my castle. Even more than that, I'd say that home is church to me . . . to find peace and quiet and beauty with no static."

For most people, the home is a church in that it is the place where ultimate goals can be cultivated, sheltered from the intrusions of public life. It is true that almost always such ultimate goals are secular and tend to be rather pathetic in their aims: to relax, to be comfortable, to be close with other people. But whether or not one likes it, for most, these are ultimate goals, whose attainment is made possible in the home.

Before examining in detail what our respondents said about their homes, one more contextual issue must be mentioned. When discussing "homes" in this study, we are referring to physical structures that are quite unique in the world, although not in the United States. The majority of the people we talked to lived in quarters that by world standards were incredibly spacious, well built, and full of material comforts. Yet several persons complained about lack of space, or the dilapidated conditions of their homes, even when there were more than two rooms for each person in the family. By contrast, in a country like El Salvador, where the mean household density is three persons per room, and 60 percent of all families live in one room units, people rarely complained about feeling crowded (Martin-Barro, 1979). Thus the standards for what constitutes an adequate home in the physical sense are extremely variable; in our culture it is possible for people to feel dissatisfied with a home that in most other parts of the world would be considered palatial. When talking about their homes, then, our respondents, even those who are classified as lower-middle class, reflect a set of expectations that are quite unique in time and place. What they describe is not home in any abstract sense but the kind of home that shelters and supports the self of average Americans in the last quarter of the twentieth century.

## Physical dimensions of the home

In this sample 69 percent of the respondents live in single family houses, the rest live in apartments or condominiums. Thus much of the discussion of interiors in this chapter will be concerned with houses, although the argument will usually apply to multiple-family dwellings as well. The first item on the home interview was the following question: "Could you describe your home to me as if I were someone who had never seen it?" This question usually produced a long and detailed description. If the respondent chose to describe the feelings, moods, and atmosphere of the home, then the interviewer probed further for a physical description; if an exclusively physical account was given, then an emotional description was sought. An illustrative answer is the following one given by a 75-year-old grandfather:

This quotation illustrates the kind of detail respondents gave to the physical and the emotional description of the home. Like most men, this respondent dwells more extensively on the physical aspects: the size of the lot, the weight of the building material, the improvements he built, such as the fountain and the lighting system. In terms of psychological dimensions he has little to say: It is the place where he raised his children. And then he adds the insight: To make a home, one requires undivided attention. Of course, attention is required to make anything, but this respondent meant that homes are made with a special kind. That is, as one needs the specialized attention of builders, carpenters, and plumbers to make a house, one needs the specialized attention of "homemakers" or "devoted wives" to make a home. But enough for now about the emotional descriptions of the home, which will be discussed more extensively later.

The preceding answer is in many ways a good prototype of the physical description most people gave of their homes. Let us review its three main components:

1 "It is a . . . ranch style home." Variations on this element are: It is a Victorian frame house, a Cape Cod, a Queen Anne, a Mediterranean stucco, an eight-flat Georgian brownstone, and so forth. In other words, one element of the physical description identifies the architectural style of the dwelling.

2 "There is a living room, a kitchen . . ." The second element of the description is usually a list of the number and function of the subdivisions of space within the building. Although these vary, the list of rooms tends to be rather similar across families.

3 "It sits on a pie-shaped lot . . ." The third element often consists of those peculiarities that make the dwelling unique to the respondent.

At first glance these three structural characteristics seem so obvious as to be trivial. In what other way could a dwelling be described? If one is to give someone else an idea of what it looks like, one must mention style, size, and functional differentiation, plus unusual characteristics. Yet even these obvious factors provide some insight into the peculiar nature of the contemporary American home. First, let us consider style. What does it mean for people in the same neighborhood to characterize their homes as Tudor, Queen Anne, Victorian, Mediterranean, a high-rise, or split-level ranch? This means, of course, a hodgepodge of styles quite unique in the history of human habitation. If the same variety had existed, for example, in Cape Cod architecture, there would now be no distinctive "Cape Cod" home. This mixture suggests a reliance on previous forms of aesthetic order, the lack of a unified set of cultural goals that imposes itself on the shape of the houses. On the other hand, this variety can be seen as a sign of individuality: The neighborhood can choose to adopt the most successful forms from previous times and other places.

The second element of these physical descriptions also reflects the same dialectic between lack of pattern, on the one hand, and individuality, on the other. Some houses have one bedroom, some as many as seven; some have sewing rooms or music rooms; others, greenhouses and workshops and libraries and dens. There are toy rooms, game rooms, offices, pantries, porches, foyers, attics, and laundry rooms. It is unlikely that there has ever been a culture in which so many styles of life were represented by the different functional arrangements of the home.

This emphasis on differentiation is carried even further in the third element of the description. Here the respondents focus directly on what makes their homes distinctive, on what reflects their presumably individual tastes or unique accomplishments.

It used to be a stable, a sense of time past about it . . . It's got a big beautiful double pine door to go in that carriages actually used to drive into and it has a large living room with the old stall windows still in it and a fireplace . . . with a fire you can start just by flicking a switch.

Compared to other cultural periods, the house as described by our respondents emerges as an incredibly diverse entity. This variation suggests a lack of that unified style that distinguished the great civilizations of the past, but it also indicates a richness of individual solutions that is certainly equally unprecedented.

Respondents often described their homes as being "large," "small," or "just right." As one would expect, middle-class respondents said more often that it was large; lower-class ones more frequently felt it was small (chi square, $p < . 0 1 )$ . Interestingly, however, the youngest generation used size most often as a descriptor and middle-class boys tended to say their houses were large, whereas lower-class girls said it was small. Space seems to be a more crucial factor in the perception of the home for the active young.

Windows and the amount of light in the rooms were mentioned often, especially by women. The age of the home was named by one respondent in four: the point usually being that the house was old and full of character, although sometimes age had a negative implication related to disrepair. Newness of the house appeared seldom as an important trait, generally mentioned by males. Another relatively frequent dimension concerned the orderliness of the home. Respondents described their houses as "messy" as often as they described it as "neat" or "well kept." The only noticeable trend here was that girls, when compared to all other age and sex groups, tended to say that their home was more messy than neat $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 4 )$ , perhaps reflecting the socialization of a future homemaker.

The single characteristic of the home most often mentioned was "comfortable," "cozy," or "relaxing." Of the respondents, 41 percent noted this quality. Already we are treading here in the ambiguous territory between physical and psychological dimensions. To say that one's home is comfortable might mean that either its layout induces a sense of physical ease and relaxation or its ambience produces a pleasant emotional state. In all probability both meanings were intended. The two extreme groups on this variable were lower-class mothers - 70 percent mentioned the comfortableness of their homes  and middle-class boys  only 13 percent did. In general, comfort was more salient for the lower than for the higher socioeconomic status respondents $( \phi = . 0 2 5 )$ , perhaps because comfort for the latter is something that can be taken for granted.

To summarize, the kind of physical descriptions people gave of their homes contained the following dimensions: the style, size, function, and unique features of the dwelling; its age, how orderly it was, how much light there was, and above all, whether or not it was comfortable. Of course, many other details were also mentioned, but these were the ones singled out most consistently. From them a picture of what the home means to these people begins to emerge: a shelter that allows a person to live a distinctly individual life in comfort. But to see the picture more clearly, we must turn to the kinds of emotions people associated with their homes.

## The home as a shell of the self

Not every respondent obliged us with a description of the mood of the home. In fact, overall, only 45 percent of the responses could be coded for emotional content, while despite probings, 55 percent of the interviews yielded no discernible feeling tone associated with the home.

Of those responses that had a recognizable emotional tone, 36 percent were clearly positive and 9 percent were either negative or strongly ambivalent. An example of the latter is the following description by a middle-generation woman:

I liked the place when I had moved in. But later I began to notice things I didn't like . . . the house itself tends to be running down, though my husband says it's because it knows I don't care about it anymore . . . I never stay in a place more than three to five years. I want to move or tear apart the place and redecorate. And since I never quite get it the way I want it, the house has a rather transient look. And, since I believe a house reflects where you are in your life, and since the house is in transition now, I'd like to move and find out where I am going to be next, inside and out.

The symbolic relationship between home and self could hardly be expressed in clearer words: "I believe a house reflects where you are in your life . . . I'd like to move and find out where I am going to be next, inside and out." Obviously, this woman's ambivalence is not lost on the rest of the family. Here is what her 12-yearold son says to the question about the home; "It's okay. That's all. We're pretty happy, I guess. My mom's always saying she wants to move out. She's always changing things around."

The mother's lack of clarity about the direction of her own self gets communicated to her son through the house that she threatens to leave and is always transforming. For better or worse, the atmosphere of the home becomes a powerful medium for sharing emotional states within the family and for shaping the selves of those who are exposed to it. Sometimes the negative aura filters into the house from the neighborhood. Here is another mother from our sample speaking:

It's somehow not as cozy as the house we lived in before . . . somehow it's cold, there were fires and people died in homes near us, so I just don't feel at home here, comfortable.

## And her 14-year-old daughter says:

When I am home alone it makes me feel scared. When I am home with everybody else, I just want to be upstairs. I just don't want to be around other people all the time.

But positive feelings outnumbered negative ones in a ratio of four to one. Table 5.1 shows the percentage of various kinds of emotional descriptions of the home, by the various generational and gender groupings. The "positive" descriptions usually consisted of adjectives such as "happy," "close," "warm," "cheerful,"

Table 5.1. Percentage of respondents giving various kinds of affective responses in the description of the home
<table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>Positive</td><td>Neutral</td><td>Negative</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Boys Girls</td><td>(36)</td><td>39</td><td>42</td><td>19</td></tr><tr><td>(28)</td><td>46</td><td>43</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">64</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fathers</td><td>(51)</td><td>22</td><td>70</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Mothers</td><td>(62)</td><td>45</td><td>47</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">113</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grandfathers Grandmothers</td><td>(22) (38)</td><td>23 37</td><td>77</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">60</td><td>58</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Total 237a 36</td><td>55</td><td>9</td></tr></table>

aFor this analysis, only the families living in Evanston were considered.

"free," and "open." Neutrals were those in which no feeling tone of any kind could be discerned.

Table 5.1 reflects an interesting pattern. Males tend to give fewer positive affective responses and more neutral ones (chi square, $\pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 1 )$ . But this gender-related difference only develops in adulthood: Among children it is not yet present. Boys and girls are not significantly different in this respect, whereas their parents are $( \bar { p } < . 0 1 )$ . Consequently, fathers are significantly different from sons $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 1 )$ , whereas mothers and daughters give essentially identical responses.

What this trend suggests is that children of both sexes start out with a warm emotional attachment to the home. This attachment continues to be strong for women, whereas men essentially cool out in their relationship with the home. Or it is possible that these changes reflect the fact that adult males learn to react to any type of relationship less in terms of feelings; thus their emotional neutrality concerning the home is an indication of a more general dulling of affect rather than neutrality specifically about the home.

When children talk about their home, the positive aspects they stress are a sense of physical and emotional security, coupled with a sense of freedom that permits them to expand and yet to be private. A 15-year-old lower-class girl puts it like this:

This house seems gentle to me, like loving . . . to put it plainly, there's really no home like your own. I am used to it and I know every little stitch around here. Sometimes it's large, sometimes sadness is all around, then happiness is all around. Wonderful, this house is wonderful.

## An 8-year-old boy comments:

It's big, roomy, comfortable, greenish brown on the outside. It has four floors, eleven rooms, lots of toys, it's beautiful and it has high ceilings. There's one cat, lots of posters, pictures, plants, and closets . . . It's happy and free.

And when the emotional tone is negative, one gets a sense of helpless anxiety, of loneliness and emotional isolation, as in the description of this 11-year-old boy:

I feel sorta helpless. When I look down from the third floor, I can't really describe it. It's just a sort of funny feeling. Sorta like looking down from way up in an airplane or something.

More than for any other subgroup of this sample, the dependence of children on the emotional atmosphere of the home comes through clearly. What is significant is that boys express negative feelings almost twice as often as any other group. Perhaps it is this early disenchantment that turns into lack of affect by the time boys grow into men; possibly young males expect too much from the emotional atmosphere of the family  being more dependent on affective sustenance and therefore more easily hurt. As a consequence, they might turn to emotional neutrality as a protective device. Reading the interviews of the girls, one gets the impression that although they are just as sensitive to the emotional tone of the home, and that although in some respects they are even more critical of its failures, they are more tolerant and resilient  being less ready to write off the home as a loss because it falls short of perfection.

As expected, the fathers' way of describing the home reveals a very different set of concerns from those expressed by other groups. In line with the instrumental roles adult males play in our society, fathers extensively talk about the work they put into the home. New kitchens, new roofs, and new plumbing take precedence in their descriptions. The house, for men, becomes a concrete embodiment of all the psychic energy they have invested in it, both directly in the form of labor and indirectly in the form of money. Thus the house represents the accomplishments of the owner's self.

We had a kitchen put in and we enjoy that . . . We did the bathrooms over somewhat. We've done an awful lot of things in the house  you can't see them, but we have put a lot of money into this house. We are due for some painting and then I'm going to have someone fix the leak in the plaster here. It was just painted two years ago. It needs to be scraped and resealed, but you don't find painters who are willing to do that these days.

Only a pater familias could speak of his home in these words. Although his answer contains no direct affective references, it exudes a very clear pride, a sense of achievement and control that stands for affect among these instrumentally oriented males. The father's investment of psychic energy in the home sometimes results in adventurous experiences:

Since I've done work on it I've discovered lots of interesting things about it. I do most of the work myself. I found a bunch of old newspapers under the boards when I put in a new heating system, and the like.

But adventurous or not, work invested in the physical structure itself seems to be the most salient tie between the self of the adult male owner and his home. This does not mean, of course, that men do not depend on its emotional tone. It's just that, relatively speaking, they are less able to verbalize this dimension of their selves, because cultivation of functional goals has been accomplished at the expense of developing skills for the pursuit of emotional goals (cf., Adams et al. 1979; Block, 1973). In the following quotation a father manages to convey deep feelings about the emancipation of his wife and children with a minimum of emotional references:

It is as if men related to their homes on two levels. The first is the overt level of functional activity that conforms to the social stereotype of the male self: This is expressed directly and forcefully in the interviews. Then there is another level that surfaces here and there, revealed by an almost embarrassed reference to love, happiness, and warmth. Only too often, these aspects of the self emerge only after they are beginning to be missed.

The way women of the middle generation relate to their homes is also quite predictable from what in the previous chapters we have learned about their relationships to objects. They see the house primarily as a place where people interact with each other; when the home is seen in positive terms, it is because the interaction is harmonious. Typical examples are:

It's cheerful - everyone always tells me that. It's comfortable . . . and certainly filled to the brim. It's very active — and it's very different too. I've been in lots of homes, and sometimes it's like a culture shock to come back into this one. It may be too busy for some people.

It's a very big, friendly place full of kids all the time. Plenty of space to move around. Plenty of space to have their friends without me feeling cut off from doing what I want to do . . . A backyard  all the kinds of things that kids would want to have.

My home is a special place, it's large in a way and yet its sorta small in a way . .. large as in being just about enough room for my family size and sometimes it s o mall ue welw havk an th'way  t i on and sometimes it's just too small and I think my home is basically comfortable . . . as you can see we live all over the house really informal, if you know what I mean . . . Yes, and close . . . well, I know it's a mess but it's not that bad.

Women rarely complain about the house being in a mess or lacking in amenities or style, as long as the family interaction is friendly, warm, active, and comfortable. Another way in which concern with emotional harmony manifested itself was in their reliance on color terms. Over and over women mentioned a "yellow kitchen" or a "blue pastel bedroom," obviously intending to convey a certain mood with that description. Men almost never did so. In scoring the Rorschach inkblot test the mention of color is taken as an emotional indicator, and these responses suggest that the use of color to describe the objective household is also a good indicator of emotional significance. Of course, the Rorschach test is "projective" in that it tries to elicit the inner psychological profile of the respondent. Our "measure," by contrast, elicits the psychological profile of the person through his or her valuation of the actual domestic environment.

Again, although this concern with a friendly social context in which their children could grow to be individuals was the major theme emerging from the mothers' interviews, it was certainly not the only one. Like their husbands, the women took pride in the work they put in the home and learned about their selves from the feedback the home provided. Of course, the work they were concerned about was less often structural  such as taking out a wall or putting in new plumbing - and tended to be a question of decoration that affects mood rather than material comfort: a new wallpaper, different furniture, a rearrangement that, in the words of our respondents, alters the "personality" of the home.

Although these women were more involved in the emotional state of the home than their husbands and sons, one gets the impression that they were less dependent on it than their spouses or children were. Perhaps being the ones who through their psychic activity created a home inside the house, women felt more in control over it and knew that maintaining whatever affective relationships had been established was within their power. And yet they were not entirely autonomous from their spouses in maintaining the emotional tone of the household. In those families where the husband expressed positive affect towards the home, 73 percent of the wives also did; in those where the husband was neutral, only 46 percent of the wives were positive; and of the ten families without husbands, in only one did the wife have a positive view of the home. Clearly, maintaining a harmonious emotional center is a much easier task when both partners are involved; still, in the culture we are considering, the women assume most of this burden.

The most complex set of relationships to the home is found in the generation of the grandparents. Some of the older respondents had to move to a retirement home bereft of memories and individuality. A number of others had to move in with their children or relatives, again becoming dependent on the moods of other people. Still others had to resettle in smaller quarters after their children had all moved out. Often the descriptions have a tone of grim resignation or of small expectations barely met:

It's a place to live, and that's all . . . it makes me feel I have some place to live.   
Won't be pushed around or pushed out. It makes me feel good. I feel safe.

Not surprisingly, those who were able to remain in their old places stress the importance of the continuity of memories and experiences the home represents:

It's home to us because we raised our children here . . .

I lived in it for 34 years; it's like an old bathrobe: when you put it on, it feels so good.

It's just a nice place to go to. It's got so many memories. With never  I'm very lucky - never a bad time.

Those who live by themselves prize the privacy and independence afforded by their own place. In the words of a 68-year-old woman:

Well, I feel happy in my home. Most of the time I'd rather be in my home than anyplace else. When I am in my home I can do anything I want to do, read my Bible as long as I want to, pray on my knees if I want to, if I want to shout I can shout and not disturb nobody. I just love to be in my home.

As this excerpt and an earlier quotation suggest, the home frequently becomes a place where religious goals are pursued in later life. This is true almost exclusively of women, as if their earlier investment of psychic energy in the goals of others later in life gets rechanneled in patterns dictated by an even broader value system:

I have a peaceful home and a religious home. I don't believe in those things that I don't think is religious and I usually have a radio in the kitchen and I keep the Moody Bible Institute on and I sends them donations.

My object is to keep my family, as my mother used to pray, and every holiday, when we were together we'd all get in a circle, chairs all around, all kneel down and each of us would hold the other's hand, and my mother would always say a prayer and we hoped that we would always stay together like links of chain, and be concerned about each other and love each other.

It would be very easy to dismiss such musings as referring to a kind of religion that is the opiate of the masses. In fact, it seems quite clear that for the first two women, previously quoted, religion is a solace in solitude, and for the third it is an almost magical incantation to preserve family unity, thereby avoiding loneliness. Yet it would be an arrogant prejudice indeed to discount the value of prayer and ritual in the lives of these people. After all, our sophisticated culture has not yet discovered a more effective way to express the relatedness of people or the hope for transcending the limitations of individuals bound by mortality to an ephemeral span of existence. Religion, however crude, can still act as a potent symbol for the transcendence of the individual's own self.

## The "inner sanctum"

After the respondents described their homes, they were asked the following question: "Where in your home do you feel most at home?" The answers afford a more intimate glimpse of the psychological significance of the domestic environment. Here again, the responses reveal different conceptions of the self rooted in particular activities and interactions with the spatial possibilities of the house.

Table 5.2 shows that although the living room was most often mentioned as the center of the house, this was due mainly to the adults' responses. Children tended to feel most at home in their own bedrooms. Their reasons are a poignant illustration of the great need for autonomy and privacy that children, especially during adolescence, feel. Here is the answer of a 15-year-old girl:

In my room. It has all the needs I want in there, except for food and I go to the kitchen for that. All the needs, if I'm scared or something, I go to my room and sit on my bed.

## An 8-year-old boy responded:

My room because that's where I mostly am and where I sleep. It's where my toys are and where I play.

The by now familiar differentiation of meanings by gender again appears among adults. The kitchen and cooking activities are traditionally associated with women in American culture, and the mothers in the sample felt at home most often in the kitchen partly because that is where they spend the most time and also because it serves as their base of domestic operations:

I would say the kitchen. That's generally where I might talk on the phone. I'm usually cooking there and I enjoy cooking so it's a pleasurable room for me. I might sit there at the table and do any work that requires writing. So I'm most comfortable in the kitchen.

The kitchen. Because it's cozy. It's full of things I use all the time. It's a place where I do a lot of my thinking, a place where I vent a lot of my frustrations, the place where I create some good food  I bake bread and slap the board.

Again, the sexual stereotype asserts itself in the males' choice of the basement den and recreation area as their favorite place, which they mention much more often than their wives. In the following response one finds clear examples of the masculine instrumental orientation and also of the usually less obvious, almost childlike, emotional dependence:

Table 5.2. Part of the house in which respondents feel "most at home"
<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="4">Generational differences (% mentioning)</td><td colspan="2">Sex differences</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Children (N = 79)</td><td>Parents (N = 149)</td><td>Grandparents (N = 82)</td><td>Chi-square</td><td>Males (N = 138)</td><td>Females (N = 172)</td><td>Chi-square</td></tr><tr><td>Living room</td><td>18</td><td>31</td><td>26</td><td>NS</td><td>29</td><td>25</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Own bedroom</td><td>53</td><td>13</td><td>12</td><td>.001</td><td>25</td><td>22</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Kitchen</td><td>7</td><td>23</td><td>16</td><td>.025</td><td>6</td><td>25</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td>Study</td><td>5</td><td>9</td><td>15</td><td>NS</td><td>17</td><td>3</td><td>.001</td></tr><tr><td>Dining room</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>NS</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Basement</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>NS</td><td>5</td><td>1</td><td>.025</td></tr><tr><td>Whole house</td><td>5</td><td>15</td><td>18</td><td>.05</td><td>12</td><td>15</td><td>NS</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>7</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>100</td><td>100</td><td>100</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

In my little study which I arranged downstairs . . . I built all the furniture, the desk, chair, bookcase, everything down there, so they surround me. It's a sort of womblike area, situation. It's quiet and it's cool . . . I have a warm feeling about the things that I've built.

For the grandparents the most homelike part of the house is often reduced to a particular chair or television set. Seventeen percent of the older respondents specified a chair in a room versus 6 percent of the grandchildren and 3 percent of the middle generation $(  p < . 0 0 0 8 )$ . They mentioned TV sets 32 percent of the time versus 10 and 13 percent of the younger age groups $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } <$ .0001).

The location of special objects also illustrates how rooms serve as larger communicative contexts and how these contexts change for different family members. Children's special objects are most often found in their bedrooms $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < . 0 0 0 1 )$ , their fathers keep significantly more objects in the basement and study $( \pmb { \mathscr { p } } < \bar { . } 0 0 \bar { 1 } )$ , whereas the mothers' are in the living and dining rooms $( p <$ .001).

Almost half the special objects children of ages 8 to 14 mention are located in their own bedrooms. However, the importance of the bedroom continuously declines into adulthood, to an average of about 11 percent, and then becomes more important in old age, where about 24 percent of the special possessions of respondents over $\mathbf { 7 0 }$ years old are again located in the bedroom. For children it is a private area that gives a greater feeling of control over the activities and objects than other rooms and thus is a place where autonomy itself can be cultivated through "dialogues" with the self, mediated by cherished possessions (Rochberg-Halton, 1980a). Because children place a higher value on action objects that hold more egocentric meanings, it is more important that they be physically surrounded in the same room where they sleep and spend time in play and recreation with those things most closely associated with their developing identity.

The autonomy provided by the bedroom appears to be a less prominent aspect of the pattern of meanings that adults cultivate. Instead, the social atmosphere of the living room becomes the most appropriate context for structuring and expressing what they consider most significant. The bedroom again increases in importance for the very old, presumably again because of the autonomy it provides, either as a private sphere where older people living in their children's home can keep personal belongings or also possibly because the person spends more time resting in the room.

The decreasing importance and then reemergence in old age of the bedroom seems almost to trace the course of the self over the life cycle. In childhood and adolescence privacy is valued because it enables the child to cultivate a sense of autonomy through interactions with an environment charged with personalized meanings. Presumably, the sense of personal autonomy is internalized with adulthood and thus the self can be symbolized more broadly throughout the home and through more socially oriented patterns of meaning. With old age, however, the self itself becomes increasingly internalized as the social activities of the old person diminish, and thus the bedroom again becomes important as a private sphere in which the autonomy of the old can be cultivated in the immediate environment of objects of contemplation.

Like some strange race of cultural gastropods, people build homes out of their own essence, shells to shelter their personality. But, then, these symbolic projections react on their creators, in turn shaping the selves they are. The envelope thus constructed is not just a metaphor. The home is an empirical and normative entity, constituted through time by the objective patterns of psychic activity that people invest in different areas of the house, in different objects, and in different activities. Thus the home is a goal or intention that becomes realized through the attention the inhabitants give to it. In other words, the home is a craft cultivated by all its members. When certain artifacts, rooms, and activities are preferentially selected by various family members to embody different patterns of meaning, then different family members can be seen as inhabiting different symbolic environments even though in the same household. So every physical house might contain different "homes," and the character of these homes might change over time as the goals and patterns of attention that make up the selves of its members change. But the home, as already stated, is also an objective entity with its own "personality," which exerts a reciprocal influence on the individual family members. It represents the gestalt of the family and forms an essential part of the social self of the individual, as we shall argue in Chapter 7.

Of course, the pattern of meaning that makes a home is not invented solely by its inhabitants. The pattern is itself shaped by cultural blueprints or "programs," to use the term Geertz (1973) adopted from the field of computers, which is why one finds such predictable differences in the kinds of homes children, adults, males, and females create. But it is still the individual person who is responsible for the implementation of the cultural template. Although environing conditions, such as the state of the economy, the availability of housing, and the like are certainly determining factors, no one else has full control over the person's psychic energy: How it will be used should depend in the last analysis on his or her decision.

## The storehouse of signs

One of the most important psychological purposes of the home is that those objects that have shaped one's personality and which are needed to express concretely those aspects of the self that one values are kept within it. Thus the home is not only a material shelter but also a shelter for those things that make life meaningful. Although we have already discussed these meanings, it might be useful to review them by examining the answers to the last home interview question, namely, "What do all your special objects, taken together as a whole, mean to you?" Again, in order to highlight generational differences, we shall consider the children's answers first.

Perhaps no respondent gave a more eloquent answer than this 8-year-old boy, the youngest member of the sample:

They make me feel like I'm part of the world. (Interviewer: How do they do that?) Because when I look at them, I keep my eyes on them and I think what they mean. Like I have a bank from the First National, and when I look at it I think what it means. It means money for our cities and our country, it means tax for the government. My stuffed bunny reminds me of wildlife, all the rabbits, and dogs and cats. That toy animal over there (points to a plastic lion) reminds me of circuses and the way they train animals so that they don't get hurt. That's what I mean, all my special things make me feel like I'm part of the world.

What is so beautiful about this answer is that it shows graphically the process whereby household objects become signs of a wider network of meanings that embrace the whole "world." It is a simple process, simply described by this boy: "I look at them, I keep my eyes on them and I think what they mean." Attention is focused on a set of objects, which release their meanings by activating latent memories and by bringing into consciousness information about the world. Through the signs that bring together the self and the world, the boy can truly feel that he is part of the world.

Another rather astonishing feature of this answer is the variety of content that constitutes this boy's world. It is not just the world centered around the individual self that one would expect from a young child. In fact, it seems to include mostly that third level of organization that is so rare even among adults: a self-world system in which psychic energy is invested in goals transcending personal needs  in this case, cities, the government, wildlife, and animals for whose welfare humans are responsible.

Most young people run true to form in their answers to what all their special objects mean:

All the things I've done that have been fun.

Enjoyment, happiness, relaxation . . .

They are kinda my lfe, they're things I enjoy . .they are the fun parts o my life.

They are part of me, I'm part of them. I acquired them. I've done what I will with them. They don't have significance for anyone else except for me and I would feel very lost without them.

All these quotations come from adolescents. The emphasis is on "fun"  both pleasure and enjoyment  and the perspective is frankly ego centered. But as stated earlier, enjoyment is not simply pleasure seeking, it is a sign of freedom and autonomy. Thus enjoyable activities provide information about the existence of the self as an independent agent, and the objects that are signs of this independence become central supports for the cultivation of the personal self.

This need to be surrounded by objects that proclaim the autonomy of the self is still strong in the fathers' interviews. The adult males seldom if ever mention objects that relate to their professional or productive roles but, rather, focus on signs reflecting their hobbies. Voluntary activities are still the main expressions of independence. Here a man whose special objects included carpentry tools and photographic equipment comments:

Well, it's either an echo or a reinforcement of the things that I like to do, as opposed to objects that I or someone else might value just because of the financial worth. They tend to give me the freedom to pursue a variety of interests. The tools are primarily to build something in this house. In other words, creative effort. And the same with the photo equipment. I suppose I just try to bring it all together.

The point is, of course, that these objects are not "either an echo or a reinforcement . . ."; they are both. They become special because they echo the person's intentions, the goals that give direction to the self; at the same time, the objects reinforce that goal by providing the specific feedback that they are designed to give. This theme recurs quite frequently:

I guess that's fairly obvious: I take pride in craftsmanship, in design, efficiency. I like machinery, gadgets. I take pride in doing things, and pleasure in novelty. Things that afford me pleasure and enrich me in some way. I mean me inside. They just seem to make life life.

Adult males also bring up another theme fairly often that seems to give special objects a much less authentic purpose. Here the information about the self is not released through direct interaction between person and object but, instead, is mediated by the opinion of others. One learns about the self from conventional values attached to the objects rather than from their use:

They mean a lot to me. They mean that I've accomplished something. They mean that I've gotten myself up to the point when I can look back over the years and see what I've worked for, and see what I have for the work that I put out to get.

No more than an ego trip. Nothing that I would go down fighting for . . . It makes me feel good while I'm enjoying those things to know that I have them and equally as important, that other people know I have them.

The next two responses were given by men answering the question, "What are your most private or personal objects?" One of the reasons we asked this question was to see what the equivalents of "medicine bundles" or sacred "power" objects might be in our own urban society. These two men did name "power" objects, their cars, as their most private or personal possessions. What gives them personal power is paradoxically the fact of being on public display when they use these things:

simplify, my greatest earning years have reached their peak. Now I must think of my children's education, give them an opportunity.

My car, probably because of the images it creates, to be very frank. Being different than most people. Most people don't have a Jaguar. It's more different than having a Mercedes at this time. . . . It's an ego trip which I admit. I don't think it's so wrong. I hope a lot of people let me do my thing.

These answers are clear examples of how "status symbols" work. They reveal intentions that consist of the goal of standing out from or above others through identification with symbols - such as expensive furniture, gadgets, cars. The status derived from these things depends ultimately on standing apart, through a competitive comparison with others' symbols of status. The owner can assimilate the "spirit" of the status totem and become, in the case of a car, a Jaguar or Mustang or any of the other symbols of prowess, dominance, or power in the American automobile "totemic" system. These objects, then, act as storage batteries of psychic energy, trophies of their owner's importance. By attending to them, or having others attend, the owner feels recharged. He gets information about his own accomplishments through these symbols and is reminded that his psychic energy has not been wasted: "I can look back over the years and see what I've worked for."

The main theme among the wives of these men is by now familiar, summarized by the answer of one woman: "They are special because of the people who are special." In effect, the attention of the women is almost entirely given to family interactions, and hence the objects that are meaningful to them are those that contain this interpersonal aspect of their self:

Memories, I would say. Apart from that, they have no cash value. It's just memories. Something like that (a sculpture) is not fantastic, but my son made it. Or like this picture my daughter made. You know, things like that. The memories connected with them.

They mean family togetherness . . . something that's just a part of our family. We do a lot together. We talk a lot and travel a lot together, and we have a nice kind of family relationship.

Even when the meaning of the household objects does not relate to the family, it rarely refers to the kind of pride derived from instrumental activity that males express:

We've put in a long time with each other, and I feel very friendly towards certain objects  but in a metaphysical sense. As I've said about plants, there's an exchange that takes place between us. I'm not quite ready to say the same thing about a wooden spoon, but again, we've put in such a long time together.

A 26-year-old woman talking about her special objects, which include ceramics, Indian bells, and batik wall hangings says:

Sensual because they are nice to feel and they are really like beautiful to look at.   
Orgiastic or what is the word? Orgasmic, yeah, orgasmic. Sensual and orgasmic.   
They're a real rush.

There is in these answers a kind of empathy, a responsiveness toward the inanimate environment based on exchange and sensuous participation rather than on shaping and unilateral control, as is more typical of men.

A 62-year-old grandmother summarized the meaning of her special objects with a few well-chosen words: "Well, they represent my hard-earned final composite identity."

This identity is, as one would expect, continuous with the adult identities of their children. For men objects represent personal and status achievement, with the additional theme of security and a sense of completion of the self  something along the lines of Erikson's notion of ego integrity. For women the theme of family memories is still dominant, but now it becomes somewhat abstracted and generalized to a feeling many respondents directly express as "love":

Love, love. I can say that love covers it all because the people who have given them to me love me or they wouldn't give me such things.

It means a whole family, that we all enjoy receiving these things . . . And if somebody makes it (referring to a quilt) and puts so much time in it, to me it's love that's been put into the object . . . that's more special to me than anything . . . if you know how many hours are put into it.

This suggests that love can be seen as attention invested over time in a task for someone else's sake. And in the lives of these people love is the most important thing because that is what they devoted their lives to. Therefore the signs of love become the most meaningful objects in the home.

When experts reflect on what the future home will be like, they tend to see a "living environment" in which electronic gadgets replace the slaves of antiquity in catering to every whim of the owner. Such prophecies are very much like this vision by Arthur Pulos, a professor of design at Syracuse University:

data banks and interacts with educational and recreational programs at will (In Booth, 1979)

Homes of this kind were envisioned a long time ago by science fiction writers. In his 1950 short story, entitled "There Will Come Soft Rains," Ray Bradbury describes a day in the life of exactly such a home, set in the far distant year of 1985. At seven o'clock in the morning the alarm goes off and a soft recorded voice reminds the inhabitants of appointments, birthdays, and bills to pay. Meantime in the kitchen, pancakes are baked and bacon browned automatically, while tiny electronic mice issue from the wainscoting to clean the rooms . . . and so on, hour after hour, including a musical rendition of the poem the lady of the house likes best: "There will come soft rains . . ." Unfortunately, the only trace of the home's owners is their shadowy outline against the outside wall, left there by a radioactive explosion.

The writer's vision complements that of the engineer, qualifying the naive optimism of purely technological aspirations. What good is saving time, if we do not know what to do with it? What if all we can do with conserved energy is blow up the planet?

What matters about the home of the future is not so much the number of rooms it will have or the amount of electronic marvels it will contain. The important issue concerns the psychic activity of those who live within it. Will the activity be turned against itself and against others or will it be invested in goals that can be cultivated to give a vital sense of shared purpose and standards for living? We worry too much about trivial technological improvements while leaving the truly essential questions out of reckoning.

The importance of the home derives from the fact that it provides a space for action and interaction in which one can develop, maintain, and change one's identity. In its privacy, one can cultivate one's goals without fear of ostracism or ridicule. The home is a shelter for those persons and objects that define the self; thus it becomes, for most people, an indispensable symbolic environment.

In describing how people relate to their homes, we have outlined patterns that seem in many ways very traditional. Sexual stereotypes are very obvious, age-related attitudes are predictable, and many of the values and aspirations expressed by our respondents seem trite in terms of a modern, sophisticated world view. This outcome, however, is not of our doing. We did not hope or expect to find such strongly traditional values reflected in the answers. If these are stressed in our account, it is because the respondents stressed them. The interpretive framework we have used emerged from the data rather than vice versa.

Despite a superficial veneer of modernity, the main concerns of these people are largely the same ones that have moved men and women at least since the beginnings of recorded history. It seems unlikely that the solution to their aspirations will come from technological and material advances. Despite a standard of living that is many times higher than any of the past or than that now enjoyed by most people in the world, persons in this culture are still confronted by the same fears and frustrations that have threatened the value of life since humans acquired self-consciousness. Meaning, not material possessions, is the ultimate goal in their lives, and the fruits of technology that fill the contemporary American home cannot alone provide this. People still need to know that their actions matter, that their existence forms a pattern with that of others, that they are remembered and loved, and that their individual self is part of some greater design beyond the fleeting span of mortal years.

Some are able to give such meaning to their experience in the home and outside of it. Others live in the shadow of meaninglessness, unsure whether the sum of their years will add up to a coherent pattern. Some seek to validate their acts by imposing order through control  skills, money, taste, or singleness of purpose. Others find solace in an order external to them, whose goals they adopt and support with their life energy. The battle for the value of life is fought in the arena of meaning. Advances on the material front are skirmishes that tend to distract us from the one issue that counts. How to create and cultivate meaning that is in harmony with the ultimate goals of humanity, the living, the dead, the unborn, is the challenge for those who have the welfare of humanity at heart.
