> 来源：Guilds, innovation, and the European economy, 1400-1800 -- Epstein Stephan R Prak Maarten Roy; Stephan R_ Epstein; -- 1 edition, March 3
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Guilds, innovation, and the European economy, 1400-1800 -- Epstein Stephan R Prak Maarten Roy; Stephan R_ Epstein; -- 1 edition, March 3\Guilds, innovation, and the European economy, 1400-1800 -- Epstein Stephan R Prak Maarten Roy; Stephan R_ Epstein; -- 1 edition, March 3.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# 1 Craft Guilds, the Theory of the Firm, and Early Modern Proto-industry

Ulrich Pfister

As economic institutions, craft guilds have been judged unfavourably at least from the late eighteenth century onwards. In the view of the enlightened elites pressing for liberal reforms, craft guilds presented an obstacle to economic growth and welfare. In the course of the nineteenth century, both liberal and radical economists considered craft guilds as a paradigmatic institution of a pre-capitalist economy, while writers of the German historical school, such as Werner Sombart, viewed craft guilds as a materialisation of a typical pre-modern economic spirit. Prominent among the arguments put forward by eighteenth-century philosophes and nineteenth-century economists figures the supposition that craft guilds served mainly as cartels for the appropriation of monopoly rents for its members. At the same time, craft guilds are said to have resisted the transition from simple commodity production to more complex production regimes, which increased the control of entrepreneurs over production and enhanced productivity by applying new technology.1

Recent scholarship has begun to re-evaluate the economic effects of late medieval and early modern craft guilds. First, it has been argued that craft guilds prevented market failure (adverse selection) in long-distance trade. Bales of textiles, in particular, were characterised by considerable asymmetry of information, in the sense that a buyer would have had to assess quality by unrolling and inspecting each bale, which would require a lot of time. Since long-distance merchants, local retailers, and consumers might all need to assess quality individually, information costs were unavoidably inflated. Both information asymmetries and the need for multiple quality assessments might inflate transaction costs to levels that precluded trade altogether and lead to market failure. A typical strategy aimed at avoiding both these problems consisted in the creation of trademarks by specialised exporters. The reputation of these urban trademarks was created and maintained through workshop inspections by guild officials and through product inspection boards consisting of guild and town officials, which controlled and sealed all goods destined for export. Examples that demonstrate the importance of these actions include the shift by Flemish towns to high-quality wool cloth production during the fourteenth century and the emergence of fustian manufacture in Swabia around the turn of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Both processes went hand in hand with the creation of urban trademarks supported by quality control in a guild-based framework.2

Second, it has been posited that craft guilds promoted the development of human capital, notably in the form of transferable skills. Before the nineteenth century, apprenticeship training was the principal means to maintain and expand the stock of human capital. Given the absence of technical schools in the modern sense, craft guilds were of major importance for the development and diffusion of transferable skills. This is borne out by the typical stipulations made by guild statutes, particularly with respect to the provision of training and labour market control. Apprenticeship often involved a time inconsistency, in the sense that poor apprentices could pay for training only after it was completed by working for their master at below-market wages. Likewise, the quality of training was difficult to secure contractually, and the threat that their master would exploit apprentices as cheap labour was often a real one. Guild rules defining the duration of training, the punishments for masters who poached apprentices from rivals, and training credentials for apprentices provided institutional solutions to these problems. Likewise, labour market regulations, particularly restrictions to mastership by specifying the length of tramping and of waiting periods for journeymen, and the exclusion of women, foreigners, and countrymen from apprenticeship, secured a rent on human capital and provided incentives for young males to invest in acquiring skills.3

This chapter contributes to the re-evaluation of the economic effects of craft guilds by examining them in the light of the modern theory of the firm. It develops the argument that the craft guild operated at least in part as a functional substitute to the firm, and it explores the nature of the competition between these two institutions. The study focuses on proto-industries, that is, on the regional export industries that emerged between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries in Western Europe. Given the focus of earlier proto-industry theory on rural areas, it is important to stress that the workforce of these regional export industries comprised both inhabitants of towns and peasants.4 Hence, I will refer to urban industrial districts, as for instance Bologna or Lyon, to urban networks such as those in Flanders and Swabia up to about the sixteenth century, or to complex systems that include major cities, small towns, and rural areas, as existed in Northern Ireland, Normandy, the hinterland of Verviers, and northern Switzerland. A common feature of these regional export industries was specialisation in particular types of manufactures, mainly different types of textiles or metal goods, that were produced on a large scale and exported to distant markets. Still, most processes were characterised by relatively simple technology, and were performed either in small workshops owned by merchant-manufacturers or mastermanufacturers, or within the household economy of small producers in town and countryside.5

Proto-industries or early regional export industries are an important test case of the economic effects of guilds, insofar as they are frequently considered as early manifestations of the modern capitalist economy. Early formulations of proto-industry theory, which derived in part from the German historical school alluded to earlier, continued to present pre-modern institutions in a rather negative way: successful protoindustrialisation, it was argued, usually presupposed the breakdown of corporate regulations that prescribed the technology and organisation of manufacture production and restricted access to craft trades. Craft guilds, seen as fundamentally hostile to an expansion of the labour force and to changes in the organisation of production, were not considered, as I suggest here, to be labour control schemes typical of the proto-industrial era.6

Recent research, more aware of the institutional concomitants of protoindustrialisation, has contributed to a revision of this perspective.7 I have argued elsewhere that it is useful to consider proto-industrialisation as a process in which economic growth is mainly achieved by an expansion of factor inputs (i.e., labour and capital), while the contribution of increasing factor productivity is marginal. In this view, technological innovation played only a minor role in interregional competition, and the cost structure of a proto-industrial system was to a considerable degree determined by institutional factors.8 The potential relevance of craft guilds in this context is highlighted by the fact that the emergence of new manufacturing sectors, as late as the period from the fifteenth through the seventeenth centuries, was frequently associated with a proliferation of specialised guilds; examples include manufacturing towns in northern Italy, the wool weaving areas of the Languedoc, the manufacturing centres of Lyons and Geneva, as well as a number of textile towns in the southern and northern Netherlands.9 Together with the prevention of adverse selection and the provision of incentives for the accumulation of human capital, the firm-type effects of craft guilds may go a long way to explain this coincidence.

This chapter starts by briefly presenting those strands of the modern theory of the firm that can be most fruitfully applied to the study of craft guilds. In order to account for potential variations in the economic effects of guilds it is necessary to develop a simple typology of craft guilds, which is done in the following section. The next two sections provide empirical illustrations for the two major firm-like effects of guilds, namely delegated monitoring and vertical integration. The final section discusses the evolution of economic institutions by comparing craft guilds with embryonic firms.

## The Theory of the Firm in the Context of the Early Modern Economy

In the first place, the firm is an organisation. Agents within a firm perform certain roles that are both relatively stable and related to each other. These roles unfold in a specific physical space defined by buildings, tools, and so on. In organisational terms, modern-type firms were virtually nonexistent before the nineteenth century; shipyards, silk mills, and calicoprinting establishments employing hundreds of labourers in the same workshop constituted rare exceptions. A possible explanation for this lies in the huge wage differential between centralised workshops and cottage industry. In the rare cases for which we dispose of the relevant information, we observe that wages paid in centralised workshops were much higher than, if not a multiple of, the amount that could be earned by means of piece rates in cottage industry. The probable reason for this lay in the opportunity costs incurred by workers in centralised workshops, who had to either buy food for the midday meal near the workplace, which caused their families to forego economies of scale related to cooking, or get their meals sent from home. In addition, outdoor work precludes the flexible allocation of labour between different activities, such as agriculture and industry, engendering considerable opportunity costs for households with outdoor workers.10

In the second place, and this is the approach taken by the modern theory of the firm, the firm can be thought of as a network of contracts. These contracts have properties that reduce transaction costs below the level prevailing in anonymous markets. Transaction costs relate, first, to search costs (costs to gather information about potential exchange partners, current prices, and product properties); second, to negotiation costs (time spent in bargaining, outlays incurred in drawing up a contract); and, third, to enforcement costs (costs incurred, respectively, in enforcing payment or supply of the quantities and qualities stipulated in a contract). Two properties of intra-firm contracts are of particular relevance in the present context, namely, the reduction of agency costs through delegated monitoring and the reduction of measurement costs through vertical integration.11

## Delegated Monitoring

Asymmetric information between parties means that most transactions generate positive costs (known as agency costs). Producers may supply poor-quality goods without buyers being able to determine this in time to obtain compensation. Similarly, workers in a firm may shirk without their superiors being able to ascribe bad results individually and take compensatory action. Finally, borrowers (and, more generally, recipients of capital) may be more liable to default than their creditors are aware of. In proto-industry, where small-scale producers frequently associated with distant merchants, information asymmetry seems to have constituted a major structural problem, as testified by the notorious complaints by tradesmen and putters-out about embezzlement by unfaithful workers.12 Creating specialised monitoring functions can reduce agency costs. Typical arrangements within a firm include the installation of overseers or of a product manager to monitor workers, or of a representative of major creditors on the management board.13

## Multiple Measurement and Vertical Integration

Transaction costs depend in part on who measures the quality of the good being transacted. If the seller assesses quality and if the good acquires a positive reputation on the basis of this assessment, quality needs to be measured only once. If potential buyers measure quality, multiple measurements will occur, and buyers may refrain from purchasing the good even after measurement has occurred. Hence, if sellers care for quality control, transaction costs will be lower and potential sales higher. This accounts for the emergence of trademarks as mentioned in the introduction.14

The relationship between different manufacturing stages of a good requiring several intermediate inputs can be considered from a similar perspective. In order to ascertain the quality and quantity of his inputs, the producer of the final product has to control both his immediate supplier (agent) and, indirectly, all upstream suppliers as well. If his direct supplier behaves in the same way with respect to his own suppliers, multiple measurements will be incurred again, and the number of assessments can rise exponentially with the number of stages involved in a given production process. The problem can be partially avoided if semi-finished goods become highly standardised and their quality becomes supported by reputation. If the intermediate goods are hard to standardise, however, the problem of multiple quality assessments and, correspondingly, high transaction costs can become pressing. In this case, vertical integration of all stages of production within a firm makes it possible to measure the quality of inputs at each stage only once, thereby providing a more effective solution than the market.15

While the firm as a centralised organisation was largely absent in early modern Europe, contracts typical of the modern firm were nevertheless present in the undertakings of early modern merchant-manufacturers or master-manufacturers. Beyond the walls of their own workshops, these men coordinated great numbers of cottage workers at different stages in the production process, such as combers, spinners, weavers, bleachers, and dyers, and they frequently used middlemen to conclude and enforce contracts with individual workers (Verlagssystem, or putting-out system). The activities of merchant-manufacturers or master-manufacturers thus came fairly close to what Alchian and Demsetz have defined as the entrepreneur in a modern firm. They monitored the use of inputs in the team production of a complex good; they measured output performance; they acted as a central party at least for contracts relating to individual stages of production; they were able to alter the structure of their workforce at short notice; and they were residual claimants, that is, they earned a profit from their efforts at co-ordinating and supervising production processes. In order to capture both the similarities between early putting-out systems and modern firms and the differences (including the absence of a formal organisation and the limited degree of ‘bundling’ of contracts), I shall call the undertakings of early modern merchantmanufacturers or master-manufacturers ‘embryonic firms’ in the rest of this chapter.16

Alchian and Demsetz argue that the firm emerged because contract centralisation provided a better solution to agency problems than decentralised contractual arrangements. This is an empirical issue, of course, and appears to run counter to the multiplication of craft guilds (i.e. of what appear to be archetypal non-centralised contractual arrangements) in response to industrial growth from the fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries. To resolve this paradox, I develop the argument that the embryonic firm of the pre-industrial era and the craft guild constituted alternative solutions to assessing the costs of intermediate inputs.

## A Typology of Guilds

In order to explain institutional variation, our analysis needs to be buttressed by a simple typology of guilds. Such an effort must look at craft guilds from a phenomenological perspective rather than from a consideration of their institutional effects, as I have done so far. A comparative analysis of guilds is often hampered by the fact that sources use a bewildering variety of terms to denote associations with a wide spectrum of properties. There does, however, exist a degree of consensus regarding the typical characteristics of craft guilds, which include compulsory membership of artisans practising a particular trade, official approval and regulation of apprenticeship and other aspects of labour control, and local or regional identity often tied to shared religious practice. Activities that were present but not universal include operation as a cartel, quality control, and provision of financial assistance to members.17 With respect to our discussion, the following additional dimensions that structurally differentiated guilds are relevant.

Craft Guilds vs. Political Guilds. Particularly in politically independent German free cities (Reichsst¨adte), but partly elsewhere, too, urban guilds acquired political prerogatives during the fourteenth to early sixteenth centuries and came to constitute an important element of town governments. This usually implied a differentiation between at least two tiers within guilds, namely, between a level of political representation, which occurred in the framework of an ‘umbrella guild’ that comprised several trades, and a level of craft association among the artisans of a particular trade whose objectives were more narrowly economic.18 Guilds enjoying political rights were probably more capable than craft guilds without institutionalised access to political decision making to control the inclusion and exclusion of members.

Sectoral Guilds vs. Guilds of Individual Trades. In some instances, guilds comprised entire industrial sectors. Examples include the silk industry of Bologna, the silk and wool trades in Milan until the late sixteenth century at least, and silk cloth weaving in Lyon until the mideighteenth century.19 In these cases, all stages of production from the preparation for the spinning or milling process through the finishing process were organised within a single guild. Such guilds frequently included merchant-manufacturers, who organised the production process and employed the guild framework as a means to control labour. The functional similarities between firm and guild are particularly obvious in this case.

Most guilds, however, were organised around individual trades. Each major stage of production had its own craft guild, with the result that the industrial workforce was segmented. The process of guild differentiation was frequently conflictual. This could reflect, on the one hand, a growing division of labour, as in the case of watch making in Geneva discussed later. On the other hand, such conflicts could mirror a struggle between different groups of entrepreneurs or between merchant-manufacturers and labour for control over the production process. The Flemish wool cloth towns of the late Middle Ages, where statutes separated weavers, fullers, dyers, and shearers, present a typical case of an industry differentiated into several craft guilds.20 Evidently, the degree of guild differentiation within an industry constitutes an important variable when it comes to discussing the capacity of guilds to monitor the quality of inputs in complex production processes.

Autonomous Regulation vs. State Control. The structure and economic effects of craft guilds also varied according to the degree of interference of outside powers with guild matters. Early guilds, or guilds operating in an environment characterised by weak state structures, often developed their regulations in largely autonomous ways. In the framework of independent towns with well-developed administrative institutions, by contrast, craft regulation had often to be balanced against the interests of the town as a whole, particularly with regard to quality control, distributive justice with respect to price levels, and food provisioning for basic needs. Official approval of guild statutes and the negotiations that preceded it may well have been important in reducing rent-seeking behaviour by craft guilds. Thus, we would expect that institutionally more autonomous craft guilds would tend to develop a regulatory framework geared to the protection of their members, and that mechanisms to check some forms of shirking by guild members would be correspondingly weak. By contrast, guilds more tightly supervised by town authorities may have had a greater propensity to develop labour control schemes that were more responsive to the requirements of exporters and consumers.

From the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries onwards, guilds and their statutes came increasingly under the influence of the emerging absolutist state, rather than of town authorities. Such a pattern of statecontrolled guilds was often closely associated with mercantilist policies geared towards the promotion of industry. The model is the French fabrique, first instituted by Colbert in the wool sector in the 1660s. The state integrated local craft guilds into a framework that included merchant control, state regulation of cloth types and qualities, and a body of inspectors who oversaw quality assessment. However, inspectors were few in number and incentives for guild officials to oversee their fellow craftsmen were weak. Given the lack of detailed regional case studies, it is difficult to tell how effective the system actually was.21 The Mark of Westphalia (later the core of the Ruhr area), which was under Prussian domination from the early seventeenth century, provides an example from outside France. The claim to royal ownership of forests and water resources acted as the point of entry for state intervention in the iron processing industries, the major trade of the southern, hilly part of the region. Until the mid-eighteenth century, the production of iron bars and small iron goods was subjected to a dense framework of state regulation under state supervision, an institutional arrangement designated as fabrique and apparently fashioned after the French model. Nevertheless, in several instances these fabriques developed out of, and retained important characteristics of, craft guilds, such as control over professional education, mutual help in cases of illness and early death, and regular meetings (including the participation of state officials) devoted to matters connected with trade regulation.22

If state-sponsored and state-regulated guilds may have been the most explicitly tailored to the provision of mass goods to distant markets, it has also been suggested that state regulation both induced structural rigidities and was ineffective, insofar as the early modern state’s means of rule enforcement were weak and less efficient than the partly customary mechanisms of self-control of more autonomous craft guilds. This is suggested by a comparison of the eighteenth-century metal industries of the Mark of Westphalia and the neighbouring duchy of Berg. Berg was characterised by weak semi-autonomous guilds, whereas the Mark, as mentioned earlier, was given a state-controlled fabrique organisation. The regulatory regime in Berg seems to have permitted a more flexible response to changing market conditions, for its industry managed to upgrade to a wide variety of differentiated quality goods, whereas the metal industry of the Mark continued to be dominated by standardised semi-finished goods.23 The contrast suggests the possible existence of a trade-off between regime flexibility and a reasonable capacity to enforce contracts, associated with craft guilds enjoying a degree of autonomy, and greater checks on rent-seeking behaviour, which were more easily achieved in guilds under tight urban or state control.

Urban vs. Rural Guilds. Craft guilds were both an urban and a rural phenomenon, and rural industries were in several instances organised into formal crafts. An important early example is given by the Flemish wool textile industry, both urban and rural, which became largely guilded between the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The linen and worsted industries in the rural districts of southern Germany were partly regulated by guilds, too, although in some cases this was not achieved until the eighteenth century, by which time exports were much reduced. The same is true for a number of other rural industries in Germanspeaking lands, including the iron goods industries of northwestern Germany mentioned earlier. Similar patterns have been described for some rural proto-industries in the northern Netherlands and Spain.24 Given the present state of our knowledge it is difficult to say whether guilds in small towns and rural areas differed fundamentally from urban craft guilds. In this study I assume, conservatively, that despite differences in terms of activity, of the degree and pattern of internal differentiation, and of access to outside power, the economic strategies and effects of urban and rural guilds did not differ systematically. While this assumption facilitates the analysis that follows, it nevertheless requires testing by future research.

## Craft Guilds as Institutions for Delegated Monitoring

Craft guilds could help control agency costs by acting as intermediaries between merchants and individual craftsmen. Many merchants engaged in long-distance trade neither bought products on anonymous markets nor struck bargains with individual producers, but concluded collective contracts with guilds that frequently covered the production of a whole year, specified prices and qualities, and sometimes provided for advance funding by the merchants themselves. By assuming quality control and the administration of advance payments, a guild could act as a collective negotiating and monitoring agent for its members. Such collective contracts (Ger. Zunftkauf ) were used in Germany and the southern Netherlands, in situations in which relatively isolated producers co-operated with merchants from distant trading centres. A few examples will highlight the working of this institution.

In 1463, the town of Breckerfeld, at the border between the duchies of Berg and the Westphalian Mark in northwestern Germany, created a guild for smiths with the explicit aim of promoting steel production, which was said to have fallen into decay. The statute provided for quality control by a guild official who would also advance cash to individual smiths, it limited the workforce to three workers per workshop, and it restricted apprenticeship to sons of masters and qualified servants. Smiths living in the surrounding countryside were incorporated into the guild. Characteristically, the guild was created in parallel to the drafting of a contract between the town authorities and the smiths on one side and merchants of Cologne on the other, in which the guild promised to supply all the steel its members could produce at an agreed price. The contract, which was clearly meant to last several years, was confirmed during most of the late fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries. This was the heyday of steel production in the area, and its output enjoyed an excellent reputation in the Netherlands and England.25

By controlling quality and channelling funds, the guild acted as an organisation for delegated monitoring. Since funds were administered by the local guild, advances could be made to poor smiths who did not dispose of sufficient collateral or reputation to raise credit at reasonable rates from outside lenders, who in turn faced high costs of contract enforcement. In the absence of monitoring by the guild, poorer guild members might have been forced by the lack of capital to produce steel of lower quality or to quit the sector altogether. By guaranteeing a supply of goods of constant quality, the guild also lowered transaction costs for merchants. The main destabilising element in this relationship arose from competition among merchants to bypass the contractual arrangements. The demise of steel production in the area of Breckerfeld in the course of the seventeenth century is attributed less to the rigidity of the guild structure as such than to a combination of factors, which included a change in the quality mix in English demand for steel, which shifted increasingly towards mixed steels that local producers could not meet, and the weakness of the contractual framework in question to resist competition and free-riding among steel traders.

Although rural guilds were quite widespread in the metal processing industries, the example of Breckerfeld seems to constitute a relatively isolated case.26 Collective contracts between merchants and guilds were more common in the textile industries. During the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, guilds of Flemish towns such as Poperinge, Oudenaerde, Dendermonde, Aalst, Menem, Wervik, and Tourcoing concluded contracts with foreign merchants, in particular from the German Hanse towns, in which the latter agreed to purchase the whole yearly production of woollen cloth. Interestingly, foreign merchants were only marginally engaged in the provision of raw materials or credit; in most cases the purchase of raw wool and yarn continued to lie in the hands of local drapers. It appears that merchants benefited from this contractual scheme thanks principally to the reduction of negotiation costs and possibly to the delegation of quality control.27

The most extensive system of collective contracts binding local guilds and distant putters-out emerged from the late sixteenth century onwards in northern Bohemia and the Lausitz in southeastern Saxony, when merchants of Nuremberg and other parts of southern Germany began to develop linen and fustian manufactures. In endeavouring to organise a large dispersed workforce, they applied the technique of the Zunftkauf, some elements of which they had already practised in Swabia, but now on a far larger scale, which at its greatest extent took in between eighty and ninety towns. As in Breckerfeld, town authorities were important mediators in the drafting of collective contracts and, occasionally, they were the primary force behind the creation of craft guilds suited to such contracts. Contracts were usually drafted in the autumn and generally lasted for one year. Supply was frequently specified in terms of the number of each type of cloth that a town guild had to supply, but in some cases, foreign merchants agreed to purchase the whole production of the following year. An inspection board (Schau), whose members were elected by the guild, and in some cases also by the merchants, ensured quality control. The inspection board classified each cloth as conforming or not to the quality requirements. Guild officials also administered advance payments. Frequently, these funds were used to buy yarn in bulk, which was an important means to reduce input costs and to stabilise the quality of the final product. In addition, the guilds extended credit to guild members to pay for the production process. As in Breckerfeld, credit management by guilds must be considered an important means to integrate poorer masters, who lacked outside sources of credit to buy good-quality inputs, into export production. As a concomitant of collective contracts, merchants had a local representative who transferred payments and products between merchants and the guild. Whenever possible, merchants chose a member of the town council, or even the burgomaster or the local judge, as their representative; membership of the ruling political body that enforced the contract helped guarantee that the contract would in fact be fulfilled. In contrast to Breckerfeld, guilds frequently concluded contracts with more than one merchant at a time, particularly in larger communities, suggesting that access to this institution was relatively easy. The cost advantages of collective contracts over the use of anonymous markets seem to be revealed by the fact that linen from central Europe largely replaced linen from Swabia (where collective contracts were known but poorly developed) in the stock of south German trading houses.28

Collective contracts between craft guilds and merchants seem to have been attractive mainly where the workforce of small towns associated with merchants originating from distant trading centres. In small, isolated towns access to a major international fair was difficult and a local group of merchants versed in long-distance trade was usually lacking, so collective contracts constituted a cheap route to export markets and an easy way for distant trading houses to tap the local workforce without taking on the costs of entrepreneurial functions. Evidence from the linen districts in eastern Germany and northern Bohemia suggests that production required little direct oversight after the autumnal tour of a partner or of one of the representatives of a trading house had concluded the collective contracts for the following twelve months. On occasion, however, collusion between merchants and local ruling bodies could give rise to more attractive terms for the merchants than for artisans who had few alternative commercial outlets. Therefore, in large towns where alternative outlets did exist, guild members sometimes successfully refused to join a collective contract.29 It is significant in this context that all cases referred to were characterised by limited autonomy and by strong urban intervention in framing and regulating craft institutions.

Whether or not collective contracts offered an attractive solution to monitoring problems depended very much on the broader structural context. The conflicts that occurred in the linen trade of upper W ¨urttemberg in the mid-eighteenth century provide a good counter-example to the last case cited previously. This region, in the neighbourhood of Ulm, then a major long-distance trading centre and disposing of a dense network of peddlers scattered across the small towns between W ¨urttemberg and the upper Rhine, disposed of ample potential commercial outlets. Still, the prevailing commercial framework precluded competition between merchants, and local state-sponsored merchant guilds or ‘companies’ enjoyed trading monopolies that did not even require formal contracts with producers. In response, the local weavers’ guilds emerged as an effective base for resistance against merchant privilege and for the vindication of a ‘just price’ and a ‘just profit’ in selling the product of their labour. One of the rural guilds of linen weavers in eastern Gelderland (Netherlands) analysed by Mastboom, which was created against the opposition of urban interest groups, also appears to have played a union-like rather than a firm-like function.30 These two examples suggest that guilds entering collective contracts with merchants were most likely to be subjected to strong regulation by town authorities, which provided merchants with monopsony profits and limited artisan gains.

## Multiple Measurement and the Vertical Integration of Production Chains through Craft Guilds

So far, we have encountered guild regulations concerning product specifications and quality standards with reference to finished manufactures for consumer markets. Their effect was to reduce information asymmetries between consumers and producers or to act as a monitoring vehicle for merchants based in distant trading centres. This section considers regulations pertaining also to semi-finished goods. It explores the argument that regulation of production processes and output qualities of semifinished goods could reduce the need for, and costs of, repeated monitoring in a production chain without creating a vertically integrated firm. Rather, guild regulations could be a means to coordinate the activities of a large number of independent small workshops specialised to different stages of production. This effect was possible because guilds did not limit supervision to the finished good, but frequently included the ‘search’ of workshops to assess the nature and quality of work processes, for instance by verifying the number and type of tools or the quality of raw materials.31 In principle, this second type of supervision extended control and measurement activities to the entire production process.

Three examples from major manufacturing cities can illustrate the potential of craft guilds to reduce coordination problems in vertically differentiated industries. In the white silk industry of Bologna, for example, the guild made sure that the silk reels were all the same size, and did not exceed the size of spool used by silk mills, so as to permit a smooth flow across the two processing stages. Reeling used six threads thrown and twisted at the same time, which made it easy to distinguish local from foreign silk – an important criterion for later stages of production because silk veils could only be made with locally thrown thread.32

In a similar vein, from the second quarter of the seventeenth century, regulations for watch manufacture in Geneva established a uniform quality of watch cases. In 1650, the guilds of watch-makers and jewellers obtained the right to inspect the workshops of case makers, confiscate poor-quality cases, and punish the artisans who made them. In this case, subordinating the earlier phase to the guilds in charge of the final product solved the problem of multiple measurement and co-ordination between stages of production. Additional regulations prescribed the fineness of gold and silver cases, and in 1681 case makers were forced to swear that they would only supply goods at the officially prescribed fineness. Such regulations finally led to the creation, at their own request, of an independent guild of case makers in 1698, apparently with the aim of guaranteeing their product; from 1713 onwards a public official, who inspected and stamped the cases, replaced the guild.33

The Genevan example raises the question of how the relationship between product specialisation and the division of labour, the regulation of transactions between different stages of production, and guild structures evolved over time. In the case of Genevan watch making, the first phase of industrial development and specialisation, which lasted until the early eighteenth century, was associated with the gradual creation of increasingly specialised craft guilds. Thus, in 1601, the watch-makers were separated from the jewellers and organised their own guild, followed in 1698 by the case makers and in 1716 by the engravers. During this phase, guilds seem to have constituted relatively small and socially homogenous groups – a relevant precondition for autonomous quality control, since at least from 1673 onwards the workshops of watch-makers were also to be inspected by guild officials at least once a month. It was thus the combination of semi-autonomous specialised craft guilds and regulations by town authorities that ensured a smooth transfer of semifinished goods between workshops engaged in different stages of production.34

Over time, then, the different stages of watch manufacture in Geneva became segmented into distinctive guilds. As the introduction of quality control of watch cases by a public official suggests, coherent and parsimonious search and inspection practices were achieved in the industry by means of strong public interference, rather than through an ‘umbrella guild’ as was the case in Bologna. A similar point is borne out by the example of the Imperial free city of Aachen. During the seventeenth century, Aachen emerged together with Verviers at the heart of a wool processing region that developed to the detriment of the old urban industrial districts in the Flemish lowland. Until the second half of the eighteenth century, weaving and all finishing processes remained in the major cities. In Aachen, just as in most wool towns of the southern Netherlands, from the late Middle Ages, weavers, fullers, dyers, and shearers belonged to different guilds. At the same time, however, searches and quality control of all stages of production were organised through a single body, the court of masters (Werkmeistergericht), whose members were elected by the city council and which consisted partly of artisans and partly of merchants who possessed guild membership.35

Although exemplifying the situation prevailing in an industry-wide ‘umbrella’ craft, even Bologna displayed a certain tendency towards guild differentiation and stratification between major and minor corporations. The Arte della Seta (silk makers’ guild), the principal corporate organisation of the industry, was dominated by the major merchantmanufacturers, and its social composition thus resembled a merchant rather than a craft guild. The Arte della Seta had privileged access to the political authorities, and seems to have been highly effective in organising the production and transfer of semi-finished goods between different stages of production according to shifting technological requirements. The Arte della Seta also successfully prevented several craftsmen associations related to individual stages of production from becoming fully recognised guilds; the exceptions were the weavers, who formed a guild in 1589, and the silk mill operators who, after a long struggle, obtained the same privilege in 1673. It would seem that the craftsmen’s struggle for corporate autonomy and control over their labour was more important than the efficient co-ordination of the manufacturing process; however, the loss of control by merchant-manufacturers implied by guild differentiation was partly counterbalanced by the increased subjection of guild matters to urban authority between 1600 and 1730.36

In all three cities, then, the problem of redundant measurement in a complex production process was solved either through an industrywide ‘umbrella guild’ or by means of a system of specialised guilds under strong urban supervision. However, this solution, amply practised during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, was not stable over time and was progressively abandoned in the eighteenth century. In Aachen, merchantmanufacturers created centralised workshops employing dozens of shearers under their direct supervision and organised a non-guilded workforce of weavers in subsidiary production centres such as Burtscheid. In Geneva, no new guilds were created from the 1720s onwards, despite a vast increase in the division of labour during the following decades. Instead, vertical specialisation occurred informally within the watchmakers’ guild. Likewise, no new regulations were enacted concerning the exchange of semi-finished goods. The integration of various stages of production tended to be handled by master-manufacturers (assembleurs), who progressively took the entire production process under their control. A guild system supervised by town authorities thus became largely irrelevant for controlling intra-industry transactions, which were being internalised into an embryonic firm. In Bologna, finally, the organisational separation of different stages of production, which was already limited by the existence of an industry-wide guild, declined further in the course of the eighteenth century as merchant-manufacturers brought more and more silk mills and reeling workshops in direct ownership and began to directly employ weavers in large workshops.37

This course of events suggests that the use of the guild system for the reduction of measurement and co-ordination problems in production was particularly effective under conditions in which capital or entrepreneurial skills were scarce. A report from Aachen in 1781 bears out this point very clearly. It stated that the organisation of the cloth trade by vertically differentiated guilds made the job of long-distance merchants very easy. It sufficed to import raw wool from Spain, have it processed by master artisans, and sell the finished cloth abroad. As a consequence, anybody with sufficient means to purchase raw wool and minimal knowledge of potential export markets could enter the cloth industry. The author of the report even purported to know a candidatus theologiae (a person who had not passed the final examination to become a cleric) who, despite having a very superficial knowledge of the cloth trade, had become a fairly wealthy cloth merchant in a short period of time.38 Evidently, the provision of quality control by the guild system lowered barriers of entry and contributed to industrial growth.

## Craft Guilds as Sub-optimal Institutions

The fact that in many previously discussed examples a guild framework was superseded in the long run by centralised workshops or by a puttingout system suggests that craft guilds may have operated as economically effective institutions in some cases, but not under all circumstances. This section begins by discussing the most frequently invoked dysfunctional properties of guilds as economic institutions, and concludes by exploring the circumstances under which the guild system provided a satisfactory solution for the governance of early modern export industries, and under which conditions it did not.

## Rent Seeking

This chapter started with the observation that the emergence of protoindustries went frequently hand in hand with the creation of new guilds.

So far, I have argued that this fact is to be explained at least in part by the roles that craft guilds played as economic institutions in protoindustrial growth. An alternative perspective might argue that protoindustrial development created new wealth that economic actors tried to appropriate by way of rent-seeking behaviour. Craft guilds, by creating cartels on markets for labour and other inputs, as well as for product markets, provided an institutional framework for the appropriation of rents by at least some producers.

This argument is developed and supported empirically by a major recent analysis of the economic role of craft guilds, a study by Ogilvie of the worsted-weaving area in the western Black Forest in W ¨urttemberg, which relies on very rich source material on the finances and everyday practices of a rural guild, instead of the institutional and legal documentation of relationships between guilds and their environment (statutes, petitions, major court cases, etc.) used by most other studies. From the 1560s and 1570s onwards, export-oriented worsted weaving developed in the region. Towards the end of the sixteenth century, rural guilds of weavers were created on the request of the weavers themselves. A detailed analysis of the enforcement of guild rules shows that they imposed compulsory journeymanship and various impediments to become a master, restricted output by quota, and kept yarn prices artificially low. Apart from rents for members, guilds produced few other benefits. Quality control appears to have been negligible, particularly during the second half of the seventeenth century, since inspection lay exclusively in the hands of master artisans. Furthermore, the preservation and reproduction of human capital was a marginal issue in a craft whose knowledge was widespread among rural households. Lastly, exclusion of women from weaving may have raised labour costs, precluded optimal time allocation in many households, and may have made it difficult to exploit economies of scale within an individual household.39

How was an industry governed by institutions that misallocated labour and appropriated rents to the apparent detriment of consumers able to stay in the market for a long time? Ogilvie argues that the fact that the Western Black Forest was the sole producer of worsteds in a very wide geographical area raised transport costs, limited competition, and created room for ‘slack’. Significantly, output stopped growing after about 1650. A similar interpretation may apply to the growing number of guilds in the service sector of the northern Netherlands during the Golden Age, which was protected from international competition, and whose actions are taken to have been a major cause of the general rise in prices and the corresponding decline in competitiveness of the Dutch economy after 1670.40

How typical are these cases? Ogilvie generalises her findings by showing that proto-industrial development frequently went hand in hand with a strong presence of guild and other ‘traditional’ institutions. At the same time she suggests that worsted production in the Black Forest developed much less dynamically than worsted manufacture in other parts of Western Europe where guilds were either weak or non-existent.41 It goes without saying that this is an extremely loose test. Notwithstanding the quality of her empirical case study, guilds in the Western Black Forest were created some time after the emergence of the new industry, and that industry ceased to grow a few decades after their foundation. By contrast, the examples discussed in this chapter concern cases in which guilds were created at the outset of proto-industrial development. The industries in question expanded for a considerable time under a guilded regime and enjoyed a competitive edge over their competitors. In addition, the examples concern skills- and sometimes technology-intensive industries producing high-quality goods, whereas the worsteds made in the western Black Forest were of a relatively low quality. Finally, craft guilds involved in W ¨urttemberg worsted weaving enjoyed a very high degree of autonomy, apparent for instance in the absence of state or merchant involvement in quality control, by contrast with the former examples, which concern guilds under strong supervision by town authorities. What we can learn from this comparison is that guilds existed in a variety of institutional and commercial contexts, and that for them to act effectively to reduce agency costs and monitor quality effectively required that they be associated with a skills- and technology-intensive industry producing high-quality goods under a degree of state control. Autonomous guilds in sectors requiring little skill may turn out to have been predominantly rent-seeking institutions.

## Resistance against New Technologies and Production Regimes

Craft guilds have also been in disrepute for a long time because of their alleged hostility to the introduction of technology that threatened traditional craftsmanship. Here it is useful to distinguish between skillsintensive and labour-saving innovations. Craft guilds representing the interests of small commodity producers could be expected to have supported innovations that enhanced skills but to have opposed labour-saving and capital-intensive innovations that undermined the small, independent workshop.42 In fact, craft guilds (as in the previous Flemish instance) promoted numerous product innovations in textile production based on improved quality.

Of course, guild resistance against labour-saving and capital-intensive innovations is documented as well. An important example involves the diffusion of the engine or Dutch loom, which massively increased labour productivity by enabling the simultaneous production of several ribbons. In London, silk men, wholesalers, and master weavers introduced the engine loom during the 1660s and 1670s against fierce opposition by the rank and file of the weavers’ guild. In Basel, which emerged as a major centre of silk ribbon weaving from the late seventeenth century onwards, traditional handicraft production turned into a full-fledged industry only after a long struggle between merchant-manufacturers and the corporation of silk ribbon weavers. The successful opposition of guild-based ribbon-makers to the introduction of the Dutch loom in Cologne led to a displacement of the industry into neighbouring small towns, mainly Krefeld and Elberfeld, where the silk trade was new, craft guilds were absent, and opposition was non-existent.43

This material, together with the evidence presented earlier in this chapter, suggests a number of critical variables that conditioned whether craft guilds would act as pure rent-seeking or welfare-enhancing economic institutions.

Complexity and Skills Intensity of Industrial Production. Where manufacture was relatively complex, in the sense that it required several operations with high levels of skill, craft guilds appear to have played an important role in the control of agency costs and the transmission of skills. By contrast, craft guilds involved in producing goods with low degrees of complexity and skill served substantially, if not primarily, as rent-seeking vehicles; this was the case with the worsted manufacture in W ¨urttemberg. To survive, rent-seeking guilds had to be protected against competition from non-guilded industries by high distance costs.

Type of Craft Guilds. Guilded industries did not face inevitable decay. Interestingly, the major French area producing silk ribbons, the Lyonnais, introduced the engine loom only towards the end of the eighteenth century. The main reason for this late adoption lies with the process of industrial upgrading pursued in the region during the eighteenth century. In both the silk cloth and the silk ribbon sectors, fashioned wares increasingly constituted the main product line, and fashioned ribbons could not be manufactured with the engine loom. It is interesting to note that silk manufacture in Lyon was organised by an industry-wide, ‘umbrella’ guild dominated by merchants, who thus exerted considerable influence over choice of technology and product line. By contrast, ribbon weaving in Imperial free cities, such as Cologne and Augsburg, where the industry declined, was controlled by craft guilds dominated by master artisans, who enjoyed political prerogatives that made protectionism a more attractive strategy than industrial upgrading. Other previously discussed evidence also suggests that craft guilds worked most effectively to reduce agency costs when they were under tight government or merchant control. By contrast, the worsted-weaving guild in W ¨urttemberg, which displayed few beneficial effects, enjoyed a high degree of autonomy.

## Evolution of the Supply of Institutions

Craft guilds acted as vehicles for delegated monitoring, particularly where long-distance merchants associated with a dispersed and commercially peripheral workforce. Guilds did this by means of collective contracts with merchants, which significantly reduced the merchants’ costs of monitoring the production process. Likewise, by solving the measurement and co-ordination problems within vertically differentiated production processes, craft guilds lowered the costs for long-distance merchants to set up their own manufacture. All this suggests that craft guilds provided satisfactory organisational solutions where financial and technical barriers to entry were high and entrepreneurial skills were scarce, because their institutional principles were widely known and could be easily supplied.

We can easily imagine, however, that the optimal features of an industrial organisation changed over time, as merchants accumulated capital and knowledge about the products they traded in. Accumulation of knowledge made it possible for merchants to identify the profit potential of branded goods named after the producer rather than after their geographical origin, as was the case with manufactures under guild regimes. The need to maintain the reputation of individual brands made it necessary to create firms, in which quantity and quality could be specified to the precise terms desired by the merchant. While this increased monitoring costs, branded goods also obtained a higher price in export markets, increasing the net profit of merchants. In at least two industrial centres, including Aachen and Bielefeld, contemporaries debating the virtues and weaknesses of the guild and the putting-out systems identified precisely these points.44

The actual course of events could differ considerably. First, industries initially governed by craft guilds could gradually develop into industries characterised by centralised workshops and a putting-out system that mobilised a workforce consisting of both urban artisans and rural families. I have already discussed such a trajectory for wool manufacture in Aachen and silk ribbon weaving in Basel, and we can trace a parallel evolution for linen weaving in Bohemia and silk throwing in Northern Italy.45

A second trajectory was associated with the course of industrial cycles. Early modern Geneva, which experienced two such cycles, offers a particularly good example. The town began its industrial development from the mid-sixteenth century onwards as a centre for silk milling and wool weaving, organised into several guilds. Around the middle of the seventeenth century, woollen manufacture moved to the neighbouring French countryside, and the town retained control only over the finishing processes and marketing; the guilds in these sectors decayed. The urban workforce shifted into new sectors, like jewellery and watch making, which in turn developed under the aegis of specialised guilds. By creating a well-established framework for acquiring new skills and for organising production, craft guilds provided a means to ease the conversion from old industries in which the skill premium had declined to new industries that demanded higher skills.46

A pattern of incremental evolution from craft guilds to embryonic firms was not the only path to more centralised organisations based on puttingout and large workshops. Initially, most non-guilded proto-industries produced low-quality goods embodying low skills and a simple division of labour. Agency problems, therefore, presented few obstacles to industrial growth. Over time, however, downstream integration and industrial upgrading could give rise to large firms. The development from the late sixteenth century of cotton processing north of the Alps, which occurred in a completely non-guilded setting, provides a good example. At first, simple, coarse goods prevailed, and rural families formed a major component of the workforce. By the eighteenth century, the industry produced high-quality goods such as muslin and technologically complex goods such as printed cotton cloth, manufactured in workshops that considerably exceeded the early mechanical spinning mills in terms of size. Merchant-manufacturers, originally engaged in the production of simple standard-quality goods, seem to have frequently nurtured this form of industrial upgrading by expanding their activities into neighbouring and more complex stages of production.47

## Conclusion

By applying the economic theory of the modern firm to the study of early modern guilds, this essay has identified several previously unidentified features, which addressed problems arising from delegated monitoring and vertical integration. These features help explain why the expansion of export-oriented regional industries before the eighteenth century was so frequently associated with the creation of new craft guilds, and why, in many cases, craft guilds promoted industrial growth. This is not to say that craft guilds constituted ‘optimal’ economic institutions; rather, I argue that craft guilds and firms were functional substitutes. It is clear, moreover, that under certain specified circumstances craft guilds acted as rent-seeking institutions, which generated considerable opportunity costs for non-guilded workers and consumers. Consequently, guilds often gave way to embryonic firms over the course of an industrial cycle.

A great amount of research remains to be done. Two aspects deserve special mention. First, many studies on which this chapter has relied use mainly documents that bear on relations between craft guilds and the rest of the economy and society. Research using sources that track the economic effects of guilds in their daily practice is still very scarce.

Local case studies of guilds oriented by an economic perspective, therefore, are very much in demand. Second, this study has analysed institutional change primarily by considering economic variables. Investigating the role played by cultural factors in providing particular institutional arrangements may fruitfully broaden the perspective. Recent research on ‘corporate language’ has sharpened our understanding of guilds as cultural phenomena.48 Blending the economic and cultural perspectives presents an intriguing challenge for future research in the history of premodern labour and production regimes.

## 2 Craft Guilds, Apprenticeship, and Technological Change in Pre-industrial Europe∗

## S. R. Epstein

Technological invention and innovation in the pre-industrial economy are still poorly understood. This is partly because of the difficulty in identifying the small-scale and anonymous innovations that dominated technical progress at the time. However, the problem is compounded by several long-standing assumptions about pre-modern manufacture, in particular by the view that from the fifteenth century onwards craft guilds – which provided European urban manufacture with its main institutional framework for over six hundred years – were organised rent seekers that systematically opposed technical innovation.

This chapter suggests that the prevailing view of craft guilds misrepresents their principal function and their technological consequences. It begins by analysing the guild structure from the point of view of individual producers and suggests that the primary purpose of craft guilds was to provide adequate skills training through formal apprenticeship. It then argues, from evidence of innovation and resistance to it, that technological invention and innovation were a significant, albeit mostly unintended, effect of the crafts’ support for investment in skills. It concludes by briefly addressing the counterfactual question implied by the guilds’ critics: if craft guilds were technologically regressive, why was guild-based craft production not out-competed by its major contemporary rival, rural proto-industry?

Rather than provide a detailed study of an individual craft or of a constellation of guilds in one town, the focus is on the broad outlines of a system that remained fundamentally unchanged for more than half a millennium.1 A distinction is drawn between the general structure and purposes of the manufacturing guild and individual guild practice under changing historical circumstances. The purpose of the distinction is twofold. First, it provides a set of parameters for the way craft guilds, markets in skilled labour, and technological innovation interacted in pre-modern Europe. Second, it draws attention to two aspects of guild behaviour that are often confused. These are, on the one hand, the technological spillovers of craft activities, which were largely unintentional, unavoidable, and economically beneficial; and on the other hand, the crafts’ oligopolistic controls over output, which were deliberate and had essentially negative effects, but were not universal, permanent, or easily enforced. This chapter focuses on the former and touches more briefly on the latter. It is concerned strictly with manufacturing guilds; I do not discuss guilds associated with the service sector whose strategies and effects may have been quite different.2

## What Were Craft Guilds For?

The craft guild was a formal association of specialised artisans, the masters, whose authority was backed by superior political sanction; apprentices and journeymen came under guild jurisdiction but lacked membership rights. Economic explanations of the craft guild assume that it performed one or more of the following functions: it acted as a cartel, both as buyer of raw materials and as seller of its products; it enforced quality standards that lowered asymmetries in information, particularly outside the local marketplace where the products were little known; it provided members with intertemporal transfers of income in highly unstable markets, smoothing the trade cycle and removing the issue of compensation from the arena of partisan politics, and it served as a bargaining unit in narrow markets in which agents held market power; it supplied cheap credit in underdeveloped financial markets with high information costs; it operated as a political and administrative unit that protected its members from expropriation by opportunistic urban elites, who in exchange demanded that it collect capital tax and tie apprentices so as to provide cities with a ready military force; or finally and most noxiously, it was a rent-seeking organisation that lobbied for economic privilege from the state.3

None of these explanations alone seems to account wholly for the range and typology of pre-modern manufacturing guilds. The most pervasive view, according to which craft guilds were primarily rent-seeking institutions, takes their regulations at face value and assumes that they acted as monopolists in political markets. In fact, the powers of craft guilds were frequently illusory. In the first place, guild privileges were contingent upon competing political interests. This meant that privileged income streams could be revoked at any time, as Charles V’s abolition of the guilds’ political privileges in twenty-seven German free imperial cities between 1548 and 1552 proved to good effect.4 Second, the interests of the more conservative small-scale craftsmen were generally at odds with those of the wealthier masters, and the guilds as a whole were often at odds with the merchant corporations, who were usually better represented in local government. Cumulatively, these rivalries undermined the more conservative small-scale craftsmen’s concerns. Third, guilds in larger cities mostly lacked the powers and resources to effectively police their precincts. Fourth, the claim that craft guilds were primarily rentseeking coalitions is belied by widespread evidence of craftsmen deliberately avoiding guild membership. I return to these points in more detail.

We must also ask whether some of the more positive functions credited to guilds could not have been exercised as well and more cheaply by other means. It is true that the guilds could help reduce asymmetries of information and promote sales through quality controls. However, in small-scale markets, less formal arrangements could be just as effective.

Thus, the bazaar-like bunching together of shops in the same street that was one of the more salient features of urban manufacture in this period allowed local customers to compare wares and prices on the spot.5 Equally, where industries served foreign markets in which it was crucial to establish and uphold a reputation by signalling the product’s origin, those assurances could be provided just as effectively by city authorities or merchant associations, as the examples of late medieval Douai and Milan attest.6 Similarly, it was possible to smooth fluctuations in lifecycle income or provide members with cheap credit by means of other readily available institutions like religious fraternities, kinship networks, urban provisioning structures, ‘poor laws’, and the like. The comparative advantage of guilds in these respects is not immediately apparent.

Arguments based on the welfare-enhancing functions of guilds face the same difficulty that claims about rent seeking do, which is to explain why craft guilds enforced compulsory membership to avoid free riding by external beneficiaries of its activities. Since the externalities of cheap credit or improved average consumption were, if anything, negative, guilds whose main purpose was to provide these services should have been faced with an oversupply rather than a dearth of applicants.7 The view that guilds aimed to protect their members against capital expropriation raises similar objections.8

Although it would be wrong to deny that craft guilds took on these capacities (including the distribution to members of politically determined rent streams), quality enforcement, credit provision, and welfare support seem insufficient reasons for the guilds to emerge and to survive for such an extraordinary length of time. Although those welfareenhancing capacities increased greatly as early modern state regulation expanded, they are best understood as subsidiary ‘non-collective social benefits’ that raised the cost for members of free riding or of defecting with technical secrets.9 They helped the craftsmen as a group to retain their members’ skilled labour and to avoid the costs of dispersal: guilds sought rents if they were there for the taking, but neither were they invented nor did they survive for that purpose.

The main objective of an individual master was to make the most efficient use of family and outside skilled labour in the workshop. Hence, relations with apprentices and journeymen who did not formally belong to the guild were just as important as relations with the guild membership. The first hypothesis to be addressed is that, from the point of view of the individual artisan, the primary function of the craft association was to enforce contractual norms that reduced opportunism by masters and apprentices.10 Put somewhat differently, the main purpose of the craft guild was to share out the unattributed costs and benefits of training among its members. Guilds were cost-sharing rather than price-fixing cartels.11

## Apprenticeship and the Provision of Skills

Ever since Adam Smith’s attack on apprenticing laws as a means of restricting access to the labour market, the economics of pre-industrial apprenticeship has been virtually ignored. Because the formal length of training that was imposed (which in Smith’s England was for many crafts still seven years) seemed out of proportion to the requisite skills, its purpose could only be to exclude competition. Smith’s argument that apprenticeship served to maintain a labour market monopsony seemed at first blush unassailable; since then, it has become akin to an article of faith.12

The argument has both an epistemological and an institutional component. Smith’s epistemological claim is that tacit, embodied skills, which cannot be formulated explicitly or symbolically through the written or the spoken word, can nonetheless be transmitted at virtually no cost. In modern terminology, Smith assumes that all skills are general. This clearly underestimates both the existence and complexity of specific or transferable skills in pre-industrial crafts and the difficulties in transmitting expertise. The question to be addressed is not whether training in skills was costless or unnecessary (it was neither), but which institution could best overcome the three principal hurdles of technical transmission. These were how to teach skills, how to allocate costs to provide teachers and pupils with adequate incentives, and how to monitor the labour market to avoid major imbalances between supply and demand for skilled labour. In the absence in pre-modern societies of compulsory schooling and of efficient bureaucracies, the best available solution on all counts was arguably a system of training contracts enforced by specialised craft associations.13

Smith’s institutional critique of apprenticeship raises the objection that, although he implied that apprenticeship would only persist where corporations could enforce their laws strictly, there is strong evidence that informal rules of apprenticeship applied also where craft guilds were not legally sanctioned.14 It is also the case that the combined vigilance of town authorities and merchant corporations, and competition between craft members and between separate crafts, made statutory restrictions on apprentice numbers easy to flout. The labour market was oligopsonistic rather than monopsonistic.15 Thus, more able apprentices could rise to journeyman status before their contract expired.16 Governments lifted guilds’ entry requirements if epidemics or other events reduced the supply of craftsmen.17 The significant differences in the length of apprenticeships between similar crafts suggest moreover that statutory length was an arbitrary and negotiable benchmark, set because the guilds were unable to legislate on the teaching itself.18 Even the apparently uncompromising norms of the Statute of Artificers of 1563 gave English JPs discretion in applying apprenticeship rules.19 Labour market restrictions were further weakened by town councils, which frequently allowed masters to practise without enrolling in the corporation and gave tacit approval to a vast number of skilled journeymen and de facto masters, ‘false workers’, and women who set up business in the expanding town suburbs beyond guild jurisdiction. In Vienna in 1736 only 32 percent out of over 10,000 master artisans were enrolled in guilds.20

The legal confusion underlying claims to ‘monopoly’, which caused friction over the demarcation of tasks, made the regulation of labour even harder.21 Whereas struggles to control new industrial processes are often decried for their coercive aspects and legal costs, they were also an expression of guild competition and of a widespread evasion of rules; similarly, the frequent wrangles when new crafts broke away from old undermined the parent craft’s control. In some cities, like Florence and London, crafts were grouped in huge ‘umbrella’ denominations, which took the sting out of demarcation issues and made it easier for craftsmen to move between different sectors.22 Changes in craft descriptions brought about by periodic fissure, abolition, and creation are further proof of their capacity to adapt to changing technical processes and tastes.23 Members of the same household practicing different crafts also weakened the hold of guild jurisdiction.24 Generally speaking, urban labour markets were far more flexible than the letter of the law seems to allow.

Guild coercion was instead essential as a means of enforcing apprenticeship rules in the presence of training externalities in transferable skills.25 Before the introduction of mass schooling, a degree of formal training was needed to iron out initial differences in skills among children and to socialise adolescents into adulthood; artisans required skilled labour to produce goods to a standard quality and to raise output.26 Masters could reclaim their investment costs (which included time spent on training, wasted materials, and maintenance) by requiring that the apprentice work for below-market wages after gaining a set level of skills. Conversely, in the absence of credible bans against apprentice opportunism in the shape of early departure and of poaching by rival masters (who could offer higher wages because they had no training costs to recover), training would have been less than optimal and would have constrained output. A lack of rules would also have reduced the masters’ incentives to develop their own talents. More highly skilled masters stood a better chance of attracting good apprentices at lower cost; the effort of teaching could also help develop the master’s talents.27 Guilds enforced compliance through statutory penalties backed up with a combination of compulsory membership, blackballing, and boycott.28

In order to restrain apprentices’ opportunism, masters also demanded rights over the apprentice’s labour through long-term training agreements upheld by formal or informal sanction. For instance, it was customary for masters to be vested with the legal prerogatives of fathers, which included rights of ownership.29 They raised the trainee’s cost of default by demanding entry fees, by setting apprentices’ wages on a rising scale for the contract’s duration, and by promising a pay-off upon completion.30 They addressed problems of adverse selection by stipulating entrance requirements that signalled the labourer’s quality or provided surety against misbehaviour, such as place of residence, family income, or the father’s occupation.31 Analogously, the entry fee to the guild was a mortgage on trust, which was used to deter lesser-known masters from exploiting the guild for short-term advantage.32 It accounts for the nearly universal practice of fixing low or nonexistent fees for masters’ next of kin. In some highly specialised and cyclical industries, like Alpine mining, iron making, ship building, and high-quality masonry, skills were often kept within closely knit kin networks; rather than a sign of restrictive practice, however, this is more likely to be because the higher risks of those industries restricted the supply of apprentices.

Equally, apprentices needed to be protected against the opportunism of their masters. They were liable to be exploited as cheap labour, and could be discharged before they gained the agreed skills. Because apprentices learned craft-specific skills within oligopsonistic labour markets, they suffered serious loss if they were discharged early or were poorly trained. Guilds therefore passed rules to enforce adequate training.33 Like masters, apprentices had to be vested with appropriate rights (including a guarantee of proficiency and security of employment over at least one economic cycle) in order to invest in capabilities. To comply with these obligations, guilds placed apprentices with a new master if the first one died. In sum, opportunism by both parties explains both why the contracts appear to be excessively long and why the relation between length and requisite skills is seldom straightforward.34

In order to allocate skilled labour efficiently, masters required mechanisms for screening job applicants, and trained apprentices (journeymen) required information about the labour market. Both conditions were easily met in small-scale labour markets with low rates of in- and out-migration, and by the later Middle Ages local markets for partly trained apprentices were making the task easier.35 As commodity markets increased in size and supply shocks intensified, however, more sophisticated arrangements to pool information and improve labour mobility emerged. Innovations of this kind seem to have occurred mainly during two phases. The first phase coincided with the sharp demographic downturn and the localised but virulent epidemics following the Black Death of 1348 to 1350 and with the ensuing reorganisation of regional markets. A second phase of integration occurred during the seventeenth century, again at a time of demographic stagnation when many European regional economies were being restructured into fledgling supraregional and national markets.36

Skilled workers in scarce supply established regional and later national associations to pool information and devised training credentials that were recognised by craft masters across a broad area. Both innovations appeared in strength during the late medieval phase of labour-market integration, at which time it became common to provide certificates of apprenticeship, making journeymen employable across firms.37 Organisations of journeymen spanning several regions or associations of towns were recorded in Switzerland, Germany, England, France, and the southern Low Countries. Significantly, such associations were less present in the more highly urbanised regions of Europe (north and central Italy, Flanders and the northern Netherlands, and northern France), where information flows were more intensive. During the second, seventeenthcentury phase of integration, these arrangements expanded into interregional and international networks of compagnonnages and other semisecret journeymen associations. Although such developments benefited masters, they also gave journeymen leverage to restrict the numbers of apprentices. Masters therefore consistently opposed such associations, at first by establishing countervailing interurban alliances of guilds that organised coordinated lockouts and subsequently by resorting to statebacked repression.38

## Did Crafts Oppose Technological Change?

The argument that the main purpose of the craft guilds was to transmit skills raises the question of their relation to technological innovation, particularly in view of the crafts’ formidable reputation for technical conservatism.39 This reputation rests on the assertion that guilds produced no endogenous innovation (mainly because they enforced strict manufacturing procedures by means of official ‘searches’ of members’ premises) and that they refused to adopt innovations from outside. Evidence that guilds set rigid technical standards that stifled innovation is far from compelling. On the one hand, it seems reasonable to assume that the reasons that made it hard to regulate the labour market applied just as strongly to technology. Because of administrative limitations and disagreements within the guilds themselves, in the larger cities – where the number of wealthier masters who were more likely to favour technical innovation was proportionally greater – officials only visited a small proportion of shops on pre-defined dates and routes.40 It is in any case far from clear that the main purpose of searches was to enforce technical standards to maintain reputation in outside markets, since controls of this kind were made by the guild officers or the merchants who sealed the goods for export, and craftsmen resented searches that could result in a breach of their trade secrets. For all these reasons, searches were unusual.41 Where they did apply, they are better understood as a symbolic means of reassuring the poorer craftsmen who had the most to lose from technological innovation, while also maintaining the artisans’ assent to the corporate hierarchy.42 On the other hand, technological innovation was not easily controlled. Technical infringements were far harder to monitor than the use of illegal workers because guild ‘searchers’ could only establish deviations from stipulated standards by observing the final product. It was therefore possible to introduce process innovations without incurring sanctions.43 Craft guilds seem in any case to have accepted the existence of competing processes and techniques – an attitude that the mercantilist policies of governments and town administrations reinforced, as we shall see later. Thus, the standard oath sworn by an early modern London apprentice stipulated that ‘his said master faithfully his secrets keep’.44 Even on the evidence of guild statutes, which exaggerate craft conservatism, statutory technical restrictions seem to have declined after the later Middle Ages, suggesting that innovation was becoming more accepted in the face of expanding markets and competition.45

The claim that guilds tended spontaneously to oppose outside innovations is also problematic. One reason is that it is excessively generic. If it is meant to say that guilds never innovated, it is demonstrably false; if it is meant to say that guilds would at some point become technically conservative, it loses any predictive value. The argument is also methodologically naive. Although it assumes that all applications that were refused were better than current practice, the record seldom reveals whether guild opposition was driven by rent seeking or by an objective assessment of the innovation’s merits. For example, in 1543 in Amiens the city council agreed to pay the inventor of a more efficient furnace for dyeing, but only if it proved to be useful.46 In the case of the widespread refusal in the late thirteenth century by high-quality cloth makers to adopt the fulling mill, which is often cited as proof of guild obscurantism, we now know that the early mills were resisted because they damaged better-quality fabrics, and opposition melted away once the machine had been improved.47 What is more, there is surprisingly little evidence to support the implied suggestion that technological obstruction had disastrous consequences for individual guilds or for entire towns. While it is generally the case that innovative regions or cities showed symptoms of technological stagnation over time, the precise role of guilds in this process is not at all clear, as we shall see. Finally, the argument reifies the guild, by postulating a degree of internal homogeneity and a communality of interests over technological change that is quite misleading.

Individual instances of resistance to change tell us little about relations between the guilds and technological progress in general. A theory of guild innovation must identify both the technical and the political criteria that dictated the choice of technology and established a given technological path. The outlines of such a theory can be sketched as follows. The preceding discussion has indicated that craft-based innovation would generally aim to save capital and enhance skills. The reasons for this preference become clear if one examines the two hypothetical alternatives open to master artisans, the use of unskilled labour on the one hand and of capital-intensive machinery on the other. When craft guilds were first established between the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries, craft shops were unable to draw on unskilled labour because of underdeveloped spot labour markets and the seasonal character of the rural labour supply. Subsequently, they resisted a move that would have exposed them to major diseconomies of scale in monitoring compared with proto-industry and factory production. Crafts avoided investing in capital-intensive machinery for similar reasons. Initially, they did so because of the lack of spot markets in capital goods, and because the use of firm-specific capital stock within highly unstable markets exposed producers to excessive risk.48 Subsequently, they avoided capital-intensive innovations because these devalued investments in current skills and reduced incentives to invest in new ones.

In principle, therefore, one would expect the crafts to prefer technology that privileged skill-enhancing, capital-saving factors. Despite a lack of systematic research, evidence from patent records indicates that this was precisely the kind of innovation that prevailed in England before the mid- to late eighteenth century, when the country’s guilds were still very active. Between 1660 and 1799, labour-saving innovations accounted for less than 20 percent of the total, whereas innovations aimed at saving capital (especially working capital) and at quality improvements accounted for more than 60 percent. There is no reason to believe that patterns elsewhere in Europe were very different.49

On the other hand, we might expect that craftsmen would oppose capital-intensive and labour-saving innovations that tended to substitute transferable with generic wage labour, or raised fixed capital costs in the industry and thereby shifted control over the production process from the owners of skills to the owners of capital.50 In practice, the reaction of individual crafts was the outcome of factors that were defined primarily by political rather than by market forces. There was a fundamental difference in outlook between the poorer craftsmen, who had low capital investments and drew their main source of livelihood from their skills, and who therefore (frequently in alliance with the journeymen) opposed capital-intensive and labour-saving innovations, and the wealthier artisans who looked on such changes more favourably. For example, in sixteenth-century Li\`ege, the small drapers opposed improved looms fearing that they would advantage the larger producers, whereas in seventeenth-century London, ribbon-making Dutch or engine looms up to eight times as productive as the traditional hand loom were introduced by ‘silkmen, wholesalers and master weavers’ against fierce opposition by the ‘rank and file [of the Weavers’ Company] . . . small masters and journeymen’. The balance of power between the two major interest groups within guilds was therefore crucial for successful innovation. Thus if, as is often claimed, manufacturing had become more concentrated during the early modern period, one would expect to find increased corporate disunity to be associated with higher rates of technological change.51 The decision to innovate was also affected by relations between the guild’s constituencies and the state. On the one hand, the wealthier and more innovative masters were more likely to influence government policy, and under normal circumstances authorities seem to have allowed them to circumvent guild regulations. On the other hand, city councils were more willing to meet the small masters’ concerns if labour-saving innovations coincided with a serious economic downturn, both to ensure social and political stability and to restrain unemployed craftsmen from leaving the town.52 In other words, guilds were most likely to act as ‘recession cartels’ when economic circumstances took a turn for the worse, but they still required political support to enforce cartel restrictions successfully against free riders and competing guilds. Thus, Dutch guilds began to resort systematically to restrictive policies when the country entered a long phase of stagnation after the mid-seventeenth century – but only after obtaining municipal approval.53

Relations between guilds and the state could also influence innovation in the opposite direction. In Ancien Regime France, for example, rather than the craft guilds it was frequently the state, in alliance with local political and mercantile elites, which developed the vast system of quality regulation over exported goods decried by economic historians. Moreover, following a pattern that we shall see at work also in Venice and Milan, it was frequently an alliance between the mercantilist state and the great merchants that actually stifled artisan innovation aimed at lowering costs. Thus, the invention of a new silk loom in seventeenthcentury Lyon was rejected not by the local silk guild (which did not exist at this time) but by the Italian importers of manufactured silk, who put pressure on their clients to oppose it. In 1728, new machinery similar to the gig-mill devised by artisans in Languedoc was destroyed by the state cloth inspectors; in 1732, the latter opposed a device ‘remarkably similar to the flying shuttle, “invented” one year later in England’.54

Since the consequences of both the internal and the external factors were defined by institutional, social, and economic conditions that were mostly beyond the guilds’ control, the latter’s response to technological change inevitably varied considerably with circumstances. Here we can usefully distinguish between ‘one-off ’ and systemic protectionism. Oneoff protectionism by individual guilds did occur, although the records inflate both its incidence (crackpot inventors were never in short supply) and its effects (what one guild refused another was likely to adopt).55 By contrast, systemic protectionism was the effect of broader, politically enforced competitive restrictions, which led or sometimes forced guilds to adopt more conservative behaviour. I have already remarked upon the conservative role played on occasion by merchants and government elites in pre-modern France. It has been argued similarly that the Dutch Republic’s relative manufacturing decline and the southern Netherlands’ continued industrial strength after the mid-seventeenth century were due to the different balance of power between merchants and craftsmen in the two regions. Whereas in Holland, Dutch merchants restrained industrial developments that threatened the import trade and were frequently able to dismantle guild regulations entirely, in Flanders craftsmen had greater freedom to continue a centuries-long tradition of innovation. If ever guild conservatism assumed systemic proportions, it appears to have been more effect than cause of its society’s economic ills.56 Developments in England reinforce this conclusion. The most distinctive feature of English guilds compared to most of their Continental peers was not so much a generic weakness, as is often assumed, for they continued to be the main source of specialised training up to at least the third quarter of the eighteenth century. Rather, it was the relative decline in their political links with the state and with merchant corporations after the English Civil War, at the same time that such links were being either maintained or strengthened on the Continent. The preceding discussion suggests that this institutional decoupling, which made restrictive legislation increasingly hard to enforce but maintained the technological benefits of the guild system after the 1660s, may have given post-Restoration England the technological edge over the Continent. Significantly, the English – who had previously always been net technological importers – began to worry about exporting technical secrets from around 1715.57 The key to the different performance by craft guilds in different European countries lies in the institutional and political framework in which they were embedded.

## Did Crafts Innovate?

Craft innovation was the outcome of small-scale and incremental practical experiment and of random variation.58 Crafts had no wish to publicise innovation; most guild ‘secrets’ appear in the records only after they had been illicitly transferred. Inasmuch as corporate supervision had any effect, it tried to ensure that an individual’s discovery was kept within the guild membership. Because craft innovation is less apparent than outright opposition, identifying the origins of an innovation (as distinct from its purveyors) is rather like finding the inventor of a joke. Jokes typically have no author.59

Even so, evidence of anonymous improvements within guilds is readily available, although its impact is hard to quantify. In a rare estimate of the gains from craft innovation, Walter Endrei has suggested that labour productivity in the high-quality woolen industry under guild control increased by about 240 percent between the late thirteenth and the seventeenth centuries; productivity gains in weaving were over 300 percent. Gains in labour productivity of the order of 750 percent were achieved in the heavily guilded book industry in Lyon between c. 1500 and 1572; but the precise manner by which this was done is unknown. Harder to quantify but equally significant gains in the volume and sophistication of production of that most intellectually demanding machine, the mechanical clock, occurred after it became organised in formal crafts in early sixteenth-century south Germany.60 Further references to equally nameless improvements, including instances of deliberate experimentation, are found scattered across the literature.61 An apparent lack of innovation can also disguise a far more complex situation. Although most commentators claim that guild conservatism caused the Italian economy to stagnate after the mid-seventeenth century, the most frequently cited example of guild-induced sclerosis, Venice, has only recently been tested against the records.62 It is now apparent that seventeenth-century Venetian guilds – whose technical leadership in glass making, dyeing, mirror making, cloth-of-gold weaving, soap making, and high-quality printing had been gradually eroded over the preceding two centuries by European competitors – did in fact respond innovatively to competition. However, the authorities frequently frustrated their activities. Attempts by craftsmen in dyeing and wool weaving and in the shipbuilding industry to lower fixed capital costs were systematically opposed by the regulatory agencies of the Venetian state. Venice’s failure to adapt to cheaper foreign competition was due not to the sclerosis of its guilds, but to its merchant oligarchy’s desire to preserve the quality standards that upheld the city’s industrial reputation.63 A similar response by merchants may have caused the decline of manufacturing in Milan; elsewhere in Italy also recent scholarship has tended to exonerate the guilds from responsibility for the country’s plight.64

An equally striking reversal of conventional wisdom has occurred regarding the Dutch Republic’s Golden Age between c. 1580 and 1680, which was believed to be the result of strong technical innovation associated with liberal institutional arrangements, including unusually weak craft guilds. Recent scholarship has shown instead that corporations pervaded Dutch society – well over one-fifth of seventeenth-century Amsterdam’s population belonged to a craft and that the majority of guilds arose precisely during the boom years of 1610 to 1670. Dutch craft guilds – including those associated with the two industrial sectors in which the Dutch excelled, shipbuilding and windmill technology – were at the forefront of technological innovation, both through inventions within their ranks and in their adoption of novelties from abroad. Jan de Vries and Ad van der Woude have followed up on these discoveries by suggesting that Dutch economic success was in part a consequence of the country’s high number of guilds, which ensured a correspondingly high level of investment in human capital.65

There is thus clear evidence both that guilds produced and adopted innovations and that under certain circumstances (including economic recession, the dominance of production by small-scale producers, and merchant and state regulation for export) guilds opposed them. However, innovation was not just a consequence of random institutional variation. Craft guilds increased the supply of technology systematically in three ways: by establishing a favourable environment for technical change; by promoting technical specialisation through training and technical recombination through artisan mobility; and by providing inventors with monopoly rents.

The first source of innovation was an unintended consequence of the apprenticeship system itself. Artisans could only monitor apprenticeship rules effectively if they located their shops in the same area.66 Clustering, which was a typical feature of pre-modern crafts, was likely in turn to produce positive organisational and technological externalities. Thus, Bologna maintained its leadership in silk throwing for two centuries because ties of kin and neighbourhood sustained collaboration between firms, the circulation of apprentices between firms ensured that innovations were diffused, and control over the raw silk inputs from the countryside gave rise to economies of scale and specialisation.67 Nonetheless, marginal innovations of the kind most likely to be fostered by individual craft districts would tend to run into diminishing returns as the costs of breaking out of the prevailing technological pattern increased.68 Although in pre-modern, unintegrated markets QWERTY phenomena were less likely to prevail because the sunk costs and externalities of individual technologies were smaller, path dependency and inbreeding were unavoidable in the long run if distinct technological pools did not interact. In pre-industrial economies, technological cross-fertilisation occurred overwhelmingly through artisan migration.

Technological transfer took place through the permanent emigration of master artisans and the temporary migration of journeymen. The former was analogous to the breakaway under industrial capitalism of small firms from larger ones; both were a functional consequence of the guild system, which imparted skills that increased the masters’ and journeymen’s mobility. Masters offered their services to competitors either voluntarily or to escape religious persecution, economic hardship, or warfare.69

Although guilds might object to integrating alien craftsmen bearing new techniques, opposition seems to have been neither frequent nor very effective. Competition between states fostered technological diffusion. Particularly after the post-Reformation confessionalisation of politics, European rulers made it a point to attract displaced craftsmen from enemy lands. The Huguenot migrations to Geneva and England and the wholesale transfer of artisan skills from Brabant to the Netherlands after the sacking of Antwerp in 1585 are just three threads in an intricate web of politically driven technical diffusion.70 Alternatively, artisans were lured from the most technologically advanced cities with financial and legal inducements and, if necessary, protection from guild obstruction; in this way a Murano glassmaker was brought to England in the 1630s by paying him five to ten times his earnings in Venice.71 Guilds responded by banning artisan emigration, but weak administrations and state competition made restrictions hard to enforce.72 The only fail-safe way to stop members departing was to offer them stronger inducements to stay. Crafts could do this through rent streams and ‘club benefits’, such as a guild’s brand name that raised demand for its products or a personal reputation for skills that attracted better apprentices.73 As it was, most artisan migrants ended up being incorporated in another guild. This was not just because it made technical sense (since only other trained workers could interpret the new information effectively), but also because the host guild often saw integration as a way of controlling alien competitors.74

Technological transfer through travelling journeymen was an equally inescapable consequence of the craft guild system. Although innovation of this kind has attracted less attention, the greater scale and regularity of journeyman tramping compared with permanent artisan migration suggests that its effects may have been proportionally stronger.75 The fears of corporate espionage that journeymen raised among masters, the existence of ‘clandestine’, non-guilded, journeymen competitors, and the fact that the most technically advanced sectors (mining, shipbuilding, building, luxury textile production, and printing) also had the most mobile labour force, reveal the journeymen’s role in transferring technology.76 The main qualitative difference between the two sources of technical diffusion was probably the fact that forced migration helped transfer technology across linguistic and national boundaries, whereas journeymen’s travels were mostly restricted to areas that were institutionally and culturally more homogeneous.

The third source of guild support for technological innovation originated with the inventors themselves. Deliberate inventions will not be forthcoming if the inventor cannot claim more than his proportional share of the gains. Of the three possible solutions to this problem (state support for primary research, patent rights to discovery, and secrecy and the transmission of secrets through training), only the last two were available in our period. However, despite the fact that the patent was a late medieval invention and was frequently applied during the early modern period, the current use of patents is in essence a nineteenth-century development.77

The most significant pre-modern incentive for invention was thus the capacity to capture the rents provided by a technical secret; and the most effective source of these rents was the craft guild – which significantly was known originally as misterium or, as in England, craft ‘mystery’ as opposed to religious ‘fraternity’.78

In the absence of specific research on the topic, one can only speculate as to how an inventor and his craft guild would react to a discovery. In principle, it is unlikely that craft guilds could extort a ‘secret’ from its inventor by force. Only a willing teacher could transmit the kind of trialand-error discoveries that dominated craft innovation, and a badly treated artisan could easily defect. In any case, although technical secrets were often kept within the craftsman’s family, it is unlikely that significant breakthroughs could withstand the guild’s scrutiny for long.79 On the other hand, an inventor had to weigh the guild’s offer of a temporary quasi-monopoly rent against the possibility of obtaining a one-off royalty (net of migration costs) from a rival craft or government. Although the costs of emigration were not negligible, the fact that most trades faced low capital barriers to entry increased the competitive value of technical secrets. Ceteris paribus, the larger the market and the higher the potential super-profits, the greater the probability that technological recombination would occur through migration.

Craft-based invention and the multi-centred, competitive institutional setting in which it was embedded came close to resembling an ideal market structure for innovation. Thus, technological diffusion seems to have been constrained less by guild coercion than by the lack of efficient channels of information about the gains to be reaped from migration. The guilds’ contribution to technological progress was nevertheless largely involuntary, in two distinct senses of the term: because it was most likely to be an unforeseen consequence of everyday practice rather than of systematic experimentation and because it was an undesirable side effect of artisan and journeyman migration. It was this inherent contradiction between the tendency to devise innovations that could be a source of quasi-monopoly rents, and the need for supra-local, competitive markets for skilled labour that supported technical diffusion, which imparted to the pre-modern craft system its main source of technical dynamism.

## Why Did Craft Guilds Persist?

The view of the craft guilds as rent seekers assumes that they operated in markets with very high economic and political barriers to entry. On the evidence we have reviewed, these obstacles have been exaggerated. Competitive markets were ubiquitous and hard to avoid. Powerful competitive pressures in manufacturing and between states meant that it was possible to delay an innovation locally, but it was much harder to stop it in its tracks. The prevailing emphasis on what the guilds chose to do, and the related stress on their resistance to technical innovation, may therefore be doubly misplaced. On the one hand, the ubiquity of free riding, of rule evasion, and of a mobile labour force together with the competitive policies of towns and sovereign states systematically undermined the guilds’ powers of coercion. On the other hand, if technological innovation was for the most part a consequence of mechanisms beyond the guilds’ control, we should be focusing on what the craft guilds and their members were compelled to do by market and institutional pressures, rather than on what they sometimes attempted to impose.

The broader implications of these claims for the course of pre-modern technology can only be touched upon briefly. If pre-modern markets were sufficiently competitive to make technological conservatism selfdefeating, the question why craft guilds were able to survive as a mode of industrial organisation for more than half a millennium is cast in a new light. In recent debates on proto-industrialisation and on the rise of the centralised factory, it has been suggested that both systems won out over craft-based production because they were technologically more dynamic and enjoyed significant economies of scale. What this argument does not explain, however, is the co-existence for several centuries of several alternative modes of organisation under the undisputed technological leadership of guild-based production.

Although centralised ‘factories’ existed no later than the fourteenth century, they were never of more than marginal importance before the nineteenth. Thus, the main pre-industrial competitor of craft-based production was the rural putting-out system known as proto-industry. However, because of proto-industry’s lack of formal training and the dispersed character of production, which substantially raised monitoring costs, it seems to have been technologically sluggish and to have delivered little endogenous innovation.80 Moreover, rural industry found it difficult to incorporate exogenous innovation without undergoing structural change. Because major technical change caused either labour skilling or capital intensification, proto-industry displayed a tendency to move either ‘back’ into craft production, ‘forwards’ into factory industrialism, or ‘sideways’ into sweatshops.81 Comparison with its organisational competitors therefore suggests that it was the technological edge provided by institutionalised apprenticeship, by its associated specialised labour markets, and by the quasi-monopoly rents over innovation that underpinned the craft guild’s long-term survival. For centuries, alternative arrangements were out-competed, restricted to low-skill manufactures like proto-industry, or forced to inhabit institutional niches like centralised manufactories.82

Given the frequent assertion that skilled craftsmen and innovators played a crucial role in initiating the Industrial Revolution, there is surely some value in enquiring how this pool of skilled labour was created.83 This is all the more the case because according to one estimate, in the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries roughly two-thirds of the English male labour force had at one time or another been apprenticed in one of the greater cities, primarily London.84 On this and the other evidence we have examined, the customary dismissal of the role played by craft-based apprenticeship and innovation in British and Continental industrialisation may need to be revised.

# 3 Subcontracting in Guild-based Export Trades, Thirteenth–Eighteenth Centuries

Catharina Lis and Hugo Soly

The recent literature on craft guilds in late medieval and early modern Europe no longer considers these institutions as obstacles to the rise and expansion of capitalism.1 Indeed, markets, competition, social inequality, and individualism are now being viewed as characteristics of craft guilds rather than as their antitheses.2 Ample material is available to substantiate this perception. The enormous flexibility of such institutions, however, does not necessarily mean that the urban craft economy was a freewheeling affair, as some authors are inclined to assume. After all, such a position would suggest that craft guilds had little or no economic impact, which is hardly compatible with their centuries-long existence and with the fact that corporate regulations often instigated criticism on the part of merchants and political elites.

Determining whether and under which conditions urban craft guilds benefited the economy requires an agent-centred perspective. These institutions were set up, transformed, disbanded, re-established, and abolished through interacting groups of agents with different strategies and objectives, amid changing and unequal balances of power. Craft guilds of themselves neither impeded nor promoted economic change and growth; their effects depended on who wielded economic and institutional control, their measure of autonomy with respect to other groups, and their willingness and ability to take the initiative. There were four main groups that mattered, two within and two outside the corporate framework: (1) master artisans, who did not all share the same interests, a fact that could give rise to frictions within the corporation; (2) journeymen, who were sometimes in a position to exert collective pressure on the master artisans; (3) merchants, whose profit margins could be significantly affected by how production was organised; and (4) public authorities, who generally had independent motives and objectives and could intervene both directly and indirectly whenever conflicts arose between the other groups.

In this chapter we focus on urban master artisans engaged in exportoriented industries. They were rarely a socially homogeneous group. While guild-based export trades in which levels of affluence, status, and power among craft members were quite similar can be found, in most cases master artisans comprised at least three categories: (1) affluent masters, who acted as true entrepreneurs and often wielded administrative control within the guild and were consequently in a position to influence guild regulations; (2) small masters, who had some economic independence but lacked sufficient capital and credit to market their finished goods themselves; and (3) proletarianised masters, who might own their own workshop but worked exclusively on commission from more affluent colleagues or for merchants.

The central question to be addressed here is, How did master artisans meet a growing demand for manufactured goods? Alternatively, in what measure did they act entrepreneurially? Making the transition from simple craftsman to craft entrepreneur might appear to be very difficult. The household-workshop system was the very heart of corporatism, and urban manufacturers were therefore generally subject to all kinds of restrictions on the size of their shop, such as limits to the number of apprentices and journeymen they could employ or to the number of working devices. Still, these guild-based restrictions did not necessarily prevent individual master artisans from expanding their business. For example, they might open an additional workshop headed by a journeyman in their employ; such action was risky if the workshop was situated within the guild’s jurisdiction, but it was allowed in some suburbs of large cities.3 However, entrepreneurial master artisans were far more likely to resort to another, frequently legal, channel to raise their output, namely, subcontracting, which entailed delegating productive or organisational tasks to other master artisans. This strategy was definitely not accessible to master artisans everywhere and at all times, not even to those with sufficient financial resources. The possibility of subcontracting depended on several factors, such as whether production was intended for the local market or for export, whether the trade was capital or labour intensive, whether the guilds were politically influential, whether political elites had close ties with guild circles and the like. The factors that tipped the balance in specific cases are not always identifiable.

Two additional complications merit consideration in assessing the significance of subcontracting in pre-industrial urban economies. On the one hand, the practice is defined somewhat ambiguously in historical research, as is also the case for the concept of ‘putting-out’, a form of industrial organisation with many similar characteristics.4 On the other hand, factual data are scarce. Both the classical studies of Fridolin Furger, Sidney Pollard, and Hermann Aubin and the more recent, innovative contributions by Michael Sonenscher and Rudolf Holbach are highly informative and touch on various aspects of the issue,5 yet several fundamental questions concerning the organisation of industrial production in medieval and early modern cities are still unanswered. The virtual absence of quantitative data is a particularly serious problem, as it precludes comparing the costs and returns of the different forms of organisation. Some of what follows is therefore inevitably speculative.

In this chapter, we aim to show that a combination of subcontracting and access to foreign markets enabled master artisans in some parts of pre-modern Europe to accumulate capital and to reorganise production with a view to achieving economies of scale and introducing new products. We argue that wherever these processes occurred, craft guilds had become politically influential in the late Middle Ages, and that such changes prevented industrial interests from becoming entirely subordinate to merchant capital. Precisely because of the largely divergent and sometimes even conflicting interests that came into play with large-scale subcontracting and when master artisans marketed their own products, the interactions between political arrangements and social relations of production, between merchants and master artisans, and between affluent masters and their poorer colleagues merit special consideration.

We begin, however, by examining where and especially why informal organisational structures that transcended the workshops of individual craftsmen in export-oriented trades were introduced and then consider the differences between putting-out and subcontracting. Next, we explore different subcontracting configurations in craft-based corporations, distinguishing between ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ forms of subcontracting and assessing the relationship between the parties concerned. We then focus on the significance of subcontracting in urban textile trades that produced in mass quantities and were incorporated as craft guilds, and ask what determined whether master artisans provided a counterweight to merchant capital through subcontracting. Finally, we examine in what measure master artisans who applied complex subcontracting systems promoted industrial capitalism.

## Putting-out and Subcontracting in Export-oriented Trades

Both merchants and master artisans coordinated dispersed manufacturing output for export from the thirteenth or fourteenth centuries onward. Some authors label these structures collectively as putting-out (Ger. Verlag), while others refer to them as subcontracting. This ambiguity is not surprising, considering the fluid barriers between the two types of industrial organisation and the fact that they have always coexisted; but the two should not be confused.

Putting-out and subcontracting arrangements first originated in textile manufacturing, especially in cloth making. In the thirteenth century (and perhaps even earlier), flexible production systems that transcended the workshops of individual wool weavers, fullers, dyers, and the like existed in all leading drapery centres in Flanders, Brabant, and the Meuse region, along the Lower Rhine and in Northern Italy. In the metal trades, puttingout and subcontracting networks emerged no later than the fourteenth century, as the examples of cutlery manufacture (Passau), armour making (Cologne and Nuremberg), the production of brassware in Braunschweig, and the goldsmith works in Lucca illustrate. Such networks emerged in cabinet making only in the fifteenth century. The delay was attributable in part to the late emergence of this trade, where production was not yet deeply subdivided and did not require elaborate techniques or costly equipment.6 During the early modern period, putting-out and subcontracting became increasingly commonplace in urban and rural export trades, where the second type of organisation even came to characterise the production of luxury and ‘populuxe’ items.7

What were the respective advantages of the two forms of industrial organisation? Let us first consider the motives of the merchants who used the putting-out system. First, they often provided urban master artisans (and still more frequently rural producers) with raw materials or issued credit to purchase these materials. The artisans concerned then agreed to sell their finished goods at piecework rates to the merchant entrepreneur, who sold them. As an informal organisational structure, putting-out tied in perfectly with the logic of merchant capitalism. The practice had the great advantage of decentralisation, and thus minimal fixed capital requirements, without the drawback of large numbers of small producers taking uncoordinated decisions. Putting-out arose primarily in rural areas, where it helped standardise industrial production, but it also applied to urban export trades whenever master artisans needed credit to obtain the required raw materials and sell their finished goods. Such arrangements enabled merchant entrepreneurs to meet sudden changes in demand without having to tie up capital or suffer unexpected financial losses, which was a major concern in an economy marked by frequent and often drastic fluctuations.

Wolfgang von Stromer has attributed the success of the large South German trading firms in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries largely to the combination of an advanced commercial organisation and the industrial application of the Verlag. Thanks to their sophisticated communication networks, the trading firms knew where, when, and in which quantities to market their goods, and this gave them the incentive to operate as merchant entrepreneurs. They were even in a position to influence demand to some extent, either through focused marketing campaigns or through privileged relationships with wholesale dealers in different regions. The firms that applied this flexible system based on credit advances figured prominently in the introduction of new products and techniques, both in textile manufacturing and in the metal industries, in the cities and in the countryside alike.8

Merchants were not the only operators that established flexible production systems in export trades. Master artisans did so as well, generally through subcontracting. This method of industrial organisation resembled putting-out in many respects; the main difference was that direct producers in putting-out networks tended to be financially dependent on a merchant entrepreneur, whose orders they carried out. Generally, putting-out masters worked exclusively for one firm or for one firm’s intermediary. Subcontracting networks could, similarly, be rigidly hierarchical and might come to resemble putting-out networks, but this was by no means always the case: the fact that subcontracting often involved a credit relationship did not entail the kind of employer–worker relationship that applied in putting-out. Master artisans who made goods or acted as factors for other artisans often worked for several principals at once and sometimes worked independently as well, calling on third parties as needed. Given these many degrees of economic dependence and independence, relationships in guild-based subcontracting tended to be far more complex than the ones that arose through putting-out arrangements, even when merchant entrepreneurs operated as Verleger and employed master artisans.

Among the advantages of putting-out and subcontracting were the opportunities they provided for specialisation.9 Although on current evidence it is impossible to determine which type of industrial organisation was the most successful, master artisans who delegated productive tasks to colleagues seem to have done better than putting-out merchants in some areas. As manufacturers, they had detailed knowledge of the production process and were therefore in a better position to assess the quality of the finished goods. The subcontractors were also guildsmen and had workshops in relatively close proximity to each other, which reduced the theft or embezzlement of raw materials that were endemic to puttingout, to a minimum.10 In the event of a dispute, both parties could enlist peers holding administrative-judicial offices in the guild to settle the matter out of court. The close proximity of the workshops facilitated the flow of information among parties and was thus conducive to product innovation. Innovation was also aided by the fact that the more affluent masters, who tended to be the major contractors, were also most likely to be in charge of craft administration and, thus, in a position to enforce economically favourable decisions.

Subcontracting networks organised by artisans arose in a ‘world of interdependence’.11 They were embedded within broader, long-lasting networks of producers based on deeply valued notions such as trust, honour, and reputation and resting on well-established hierarchies of wealth and prestige.12 Such moral categories were of great significance to relations between masters, implying a mutual sense of obligation and helping to maintain stable product quality.13 Because subcontracting networks overlapped with other social and economic networks, they tended to be far more durable than putting-out arrangements; the hierarchical nature of the relationships did not undermine this stability, since the main contractors were usually guild officials. Moreover, regardless of a master artisan’s position in a subcontracting network, he would always retain master status and could therefore continue to operate at least nominally as an autonomous manufacturer.

‘Efficiency is contextual.’14 The same held true for the practice of guild subcontracting in pre-modern Europe. Given the virtually universal restrictions on workshop size, the most obvious way for more affluent master artisans to meet a growth in demand was through subcontracting. Subcontracting masters did not need to make additional fixed-capital investments, could pass most of the production risks on to the subcontractors, and were nevertheless able to reduce production costs through lower transaction costs and specialisation.15 Subcontracting was, moreover, essential if master craftsmen wished to engage in supra-local trading activities; however, this presumed that members of export-oriented crafts were allowed to conduct trade, a possibility that was by no means selfevident as demonstrated later in this chapter.

Finally, putting-out and subcontracting were by no means mutually exclusive, and the two arrangements could even coexist in a single craft guild. Both individual merchants and individual guildsmen used them interchangeably. Merchants preferred to contract out certain production stages to master artisans, who would in turn enlist poorer colleagues. In some cases, relationships between the organisers and the manufacturers in subcontracting networks evolved to such a point that all formal differences with putting-out arrangements were elided. In short, complex pyramids of contracts might emerge in guild-based export trades, involving various kinds of organisers and manufacturers related to each other in very different ways. Identifying rigid distinctions is therefore pointless, although exploring which kinds of subcontracting arrangements arose in craft-based settings is still worthwhile.

## Subcontracting Configurations in Craft-based Corporations

Although subcontracting was widespread within corporate environments, it also occurred in trades not organised through craft guilds, such as coal mining,16 the heavy metal industry,17 and paper manufacturing,18 which were usually based around a few substantial subcontractors.19 We have not covered these sectors here. In the guild-based trades, subcontracting existed in many different forms. In this respect, the master artisans who subcontracted to members of other corporations (‘vertical subcontracting’) differed from those who subcontracted to colleagues from the same trade (‘horizontal subcontracting’), although the separation between the two groups was not absolute in all trades. In some sectors master artisans placed orders both with members of their own corporation and with peers from other trades. Tasks performed by members of the same guild in one town might be the responsibility of two different corporations in another town, while craft guilds might subdivide or merge over time.

In his innovative study on eighteenth-century French trades, Michael Sonenscher argued that most craft-based corporations in Paris were actually subcontracting systems in disguise that enabled large numbers of specialised master artisans to work together and to raise large amounts of capital. The division of labour between different corporations was the most common practice, and the production process frequently resembled an assembly line involving many distinct workshops making separate intermediate goods.20 As Sonenscher suggests, in Paris and in other west European cities between the late Middle Ages and the end of the Ancien R´egime, ‘most trades were organised around complex networks of informally constituted co-operative arrangements involving varying combinations of partnership, patronage, and clientage’.21 Of course, the existence of such co-operative arrangements reveals little about the nature of relations between guildsmen or the prevalence of subcontracting. For even assuming that ‘the master artisans within these informal networks paid one another at irregular intervals for the goods and services they supplied’,22 the ensuing relationships were not necessarily akin to those between patrons and clients. Many cases did not involve delegation of productive tasks; a master tailor’s purchase of scissors, needles and thread, or buttons, silk ribbons, and other accessories on credit did not necessarily amount to subcontracting.23

With the exception of the textile industry, subcontracting among members of different corporations (‘vertical subcontracting’) was allowed at nearly all places and points in time, provided that the subcontractor was officially recognised as a ‘true’ master artisan who had completed his apprenticeship, presented a masterpiece and paid dues to the trade; most corporate regulations prohibited journeymen from setting up their own businesses.

In capital-intensive and skill-intensive trades, subcontracting between members of the same corporation (‘horizontal subcontracting’) was generally accepted – again with the exception of many textile trades, as explained later. Master artisans engaged in construction, armour making, goldsmithing, painting, cabinet making, and tanning in the larger cities frequently subcontracted production through complex networks of small- and medium-sized workshops, while devoting more of their own time to marketing.

Within each of these configurations – vertical, horizontal, and mixed – relations between organisers and subcontractors ranged from cooperation between equals to economic dominance and dependence. In many cases the nature of the relations is hard or impossible to fathom. The wide variety of components assembled by eighteenth-century clock- and watch-makers, coach or gun makers, for example, is very likely to have been manufactured at other workshops through subcontracting agreements.24 While a great many subcontractors may have been small producers who had to hire out their labour and expertise, the lack of suitable data precludes further conclusions about the economic and social aspects of the division of labour in these trades. Undoubtedly, however, relations between coordinators and subcontractors in craft guilds were often hierarchical, both in the building trades and in export trades generally. It is also clear that affluent masters readily used their economic and institutional power to manipulate corporate regulations to their advantage, especially to reduce the piecework rates of their poorer subcontracting colleagues.25

By the late Middle Ages, the building trades were already the subcontracting urban industry par excellence, as studies of Bruges and Florence illustrate.26 From the sixteenth century onward, this form of organisation became more widespread in response to the growing scale of private and public works. In Antwerp between 1525 and 1549 twenty master masons built over half of all the city houses. In 1549 the urban developer and real estate speculator Gilbert van Schoonbeke completed the new city walls, which comprised 79,000 m3 of masonry, by subcontracting 96 percent of the job to six or seven master artisans, who in turn relied on the work and expertise of a great many smaller masters.27 The citadel was constructed according to the same procedure in 1567–1571.28 This industrial structure was reflected in the fact that, in the mid-1580s, 294 of the 353 master masons and master carpenters had insufficient personal assets to pay taxes.29

Most incorporated luxury trades involved in subcontracting arrangements displayed similarly skewed distributions of wealth. In 1496, a master armourer from the major trading centre of Cologne, Johann Kemper, succeeded both in setting up a vast subcontracting network and in controlling a considerable share of the wrought iron trade; most commercial transactions and credit operations between firms from outside the city and armourers in Cologne, including both his subcontractors and the rest, proceeded through him and his wife, who kept the books. The fact that Kemper served several terms on the city council obviously contributed to his business success, which in turn enabled him to become politically influential.30 Whether anybody emulated this major subcontractor in the sixteenth century remains unknown. Nonetheless, three distinct groups existed among the armourers: (1) affluent masters who operated as principal contractors and traders; (2) largely autonomous masters who purchased their own raw materials but sold their manufactures through members of the first group, for whom they worked as subcontractors; and (3) proletarianised masters, who were economically dependent on a principal contractor.31

Similar arrangements existed within corporations of goldsmiths producing for export markets. In London, towards the end of the fifteenth century, the goldsmiths included a minority of substantial masters (e.g. Thomas Wood, who supervised four workshops) and a majority of small masters, who frequently had no choice but to hire themselves out.32 In sixteenth-century Augsburg the manufacture and trade of gold objects and jewellery was dominated by a handful of masters, who subcontracted extensively in the city and the surrounding countryside. Arnold I. Schanternell, who supplied rulers with goblets and other ornamental objects, amassed a vast capital by marketing the manufactures that he and his subcontractors produced and became the progenitor of a true dynasty of goldsmith-jewellers cum merchants.33 Complex subcontracting arrangements existed in eighteenth-century London; between 1766 and 1770 John Parker and Edward Wakelin did business with no fewer than seventy-five subcontractors, including goldsmiths and silversmiths, as well as jewellers, seal makers, watchmakers, bead stringers, and a broad range of other specialists.34 By the end of the Ancien R´egime most master goldsmiths in all export centres for which information is available were economically dependent subcontractors.35

While such clear evidence is rarely available for other export-oriented crafts, we know that throughout the period we are concerned with, some craftsmen remained their own master: in addition to working on commission, they manufactured products independently or they worked exclusively as subcontractors while serving several clients at once. Far more, however, worked for a single main contractor. Some were subcontractors who purchased the raw materials and processed them independently, earning a master’s profits on work done by their journeymen; others worked exclusively with family members, which effectively turned them into wage workers.

Subcontracting and collaboration is known to have existed among painters, especially among the top artists. In the early sixteenth century the renowned Antwerp landscape painter Joachim Patinir, for example, commissioned the equally acclaimed figure painter Quinten Matsys to decorate his works.36 A century later, collaborative painting, in which two or more artists worked together on a single image, each executing a particular, circumscribed segment, had become a common practice in Antwerp. Peter Paul Rubens worked closely with eminent colleagues like Jacob Jordaens, Jan I. Brueghel, and Frans Snyders. Other first-rate artists did the same, as is apparent from the two, three, and in some cases even more signatures on paintings.37 ‘Low-level collaboration’, however, was far more common than cooperation between equals. Second- or thirdrate artists often worked together on a painting, each executing a type of imagery that the other was unable to do. The rapidly increasing production of ready-made works during the first half of the seventeenth century was based on subcontracting networks that were often rigidly hierarchical; a great many ‘painters had become quasi-anonymous laborers in a standardised manufacturing process, with little control over the value of their labor, creativity, or artistic identity’.38

In furniture making, master artisans at various export centres established subcontracting networks that generally comprised members of their own corporation and specialists from other trades and combined industrial entrepreneurship with commercial activities. In addition to running his own workshop, the Augsburg master furniture maker Bartholom¨aus Weisshaupt (whose clientele in the 1550s and 1560s included Philip II) had supply agreements with ten or eleven smaller masters and relied on rural producers, even though the local guild regulations explicitly prohibited this practice.39 In seventeenth-century Antwerp, the spectacular expansion of furniture making also coincided with the emergence of extensive and complex subcontracting networks run by a few major firms. Constructing and decorating each of the nine different kinds of cabinets on sale required the labour of a great many specialised master artisans, including ebony workers, silversmiths, coppersmiths, turners, inlayers, locksmiths, and engravers. The need for large amounts of capital and credit quickly gave rise to capitalist relations in the industry. Shortly after 1600, the master ebony woodworker Melchior Forchondt founded the firm of this name, which for three generations was renowned throughout Europe for its exclusive cabinets. By the end of the century, Hendrik van Soest, another master ebony woodworker, worked with over fifty artisans (including technicians from abroad) to produce the cabinets he exported to Spain.40 The stock left by the Paris maˆıtre-´eb´eniste No¨el G´erard upon his death in 1736 – over one hundred pieces of furniture, including twenty-seven chests of drawers, seventeen different tables, sixteen desks in various shapes, ten bookcases, and six closets – reveals the scale of business that subcontracting and trade in raw materials, intermediate inputs, and finished goods could achieve. G´erard, who was also a wholesale supplier of unfinished and finished wood, probably supplied many of his subcontractors and increased their dependence on him.41

Subcontracting gave rise both to scale economies and to increased differentials in wealth between masters not just in the luxury trades, as the example of the Cologne tanners shows. The growing importance of the international fairs in Frankfurt and other Central European cities during the sixteenth century gave tanners the opportunity to maintain a larger product stock. This gave those with better access to capital and credit an edge, such that by the 1550s about 40 percent of the master tanners in Cologne had lost their economic independence and worked as subcontractors for the top 20 percent. The position of the small masters was further undermined by growing competition from the St¨orer, journeymen with no hope of becoming masters who manufactured for a main contractor from their homes. Although this was against the law, the large master tanners who controlled the guild administration tacitly allowed it.42

Fragmentary data indicate that similar cases existed in many other guild-based export industries, including the production of small metal objects.43 While identifying the extent of the subcontracting networks and establishing comparisons based on time and place will probably never be possible for all incorporated trades, there is little doubt that subcontracting was commonplace in many industries, towns, and periods as far back as the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and that it increased productivity through economies of scale and scope, especially in capitalintensive export trades. The independent role of merchant capital in these trades should therefore not be exaggerated, important though it was. In the textile trades, however, opportunities for master artisans to launch entrepreneurial initiatives were much less clear, since the most labourintensive branches required minimal fixed-capital investments and were rarely very skill-intensive. This made merchants far more inclined to become involved in production, especially since no other industrial item was so important in international trade.

## Guild-based Textile Trades: Merchant Capital and Subcontracting

The topic of this chapter requires focusing on the urban textile trades for three reasons. First, no other branch of industry generated as much employment, income, and opportunities for profit before the nineteenth century. Second, it has been argued that during the late Middle Ages and the early modern period textile manufacturing (especially weaving) was increasingly controlled by merchant-entrepreneurs who made extensive use of the putting-out system. While this account is probably accurate from a global European perspective, master artisans in some regions and periods played a far greater role in organising the production process than is generally assumed. Third, the proto-industrialisation debate long diverted attention from urban manufacturing, which according to many authors consistently lacked flexibility and dynamics, a shortcoming generally attributed to the rigidity of the craft guilds.44 The discussion about subcontracting networks under the central supervision of master artisans in the textile trades is cause for a few observations on this issue.

Precisely because of the high stakes involved, merchants and master artisans often vied for control over the urban textile trades, at least with respect to activities that could be organised on a putting-out basis. Merchants would engage in such initiatives only if they considered them essential to their profit margins; where this was not the case, they tried to retain their flexibility and freedom of manoeuvre. Accordingly, symbiotic relationships often arose between merchants and master artisans in the finishing branches of textile manufacturing such as bleaching, dyeing, and shearing.

During the first half of the sixteenth century, when Antwerp became a leading centre for finishing undyed woolen cloths from England, a few merchants set up or purchased their own workshops and employed master artisans to run them. However, international firms such as the Schetz, the Van Bombergen, the Fugger, and the Welser, which sold substantial quantities of English cloths abroad, had no interest in the finishing processes, which required major capital investments and additional risks on their part. Nor did they wish to directly incur the monitoring and other transaction costs arising from subcontracting among a great many master artisans. Instead, they turned to master cloth-finishers who employed fifteen, twenty, or more journeymen each, subcontracted extensively, and benefited from economies of scale. In 1562 these masters were authorised by the city council to register sons over fifteen years of age as masters, thereby strengthening their economic position since in most cases the father was the true owner of the workshop ostensibly run by the youth. Economic contrasts within the cloth finishers’ guild were very pronounced, as most members had no option than to work for capitalist masters at extremely low piecework rates; in 1580, 150 impoverished master finishers signed a letter of protest accusing the affluent masters of ‘insatiable greed’.45 Wealthy contracting masters also ruthlessly exploited a provision in the guild regulations that permitted the recruitment of non-guilded workers when demand for cloth exceeded supply or when the ‘free’ journeymen refused to work at the official rates.46

Similar conditions applied in the same period to the Antwerp dyeing industry, enabling a small minority of capitalist master artisans to gain economic control and run the guild for their own purposes. Eventually, they managed to restrict access to the mastership so as to strengthen their negotiating hand with the large merchants. This, however, was a step too far and, soon after the merchants lodged an official complaint, the guild was abolished by the city council. A quarter of a century later the guild’s reestablishment led to a similar course of events and, in the resulting decree of 1613, the urban magistracy forced the cloth dyers to accept all candidates who passed a new mastership examination over the following three years.47

Conditions were considerably more complicated in the more labourintensive sectors of the textile trades. Except in wool carding, organisation of the preparatory operations rarely gave rise to conflicts between merchants and master artisans, as the operations were usually performed in the countryside, and if they did take place in the town, they occurred outside the corporate framework. On the other hand, with respect to weaving (irrespective of the raw material involved), the interests of the two groups could diverge quite strongly, for merchants could control production through putting-out arrangements without major capital investments. They had cause to tighten their control especially at times of rising demand or stiffer international competition. The presence or absence of powerful craft guilds was crucial in this respect. Where corporate organisations had little or no influence on the local magistracy, merchant entrepreneurs nearly always had the upper hand. If the political elite needed to consider the interests of powerful craft guilds, however, master weavers were generally allowed to bypass merchants by subcontracting and marketing their output; marketing was essential to make substantial profits and accumulate capital. Thus, the use of putting-out by merchants or of subcontracting by craftsmen depended largely on the local balance of power, and evaluations of guild-based textile trades require investigating the economic and particularly the institutional context.

Merchant-entrepreneurs controlled the textile industry in most export centres in late medieval Northern Italy, both because of their solvency and because of the minimal political influence of the craft guilds.48 In fourteenth-century Florence the cloth industry was dominated by major trading firms like the Datini, the Del Bene, and the Strozzi, who had their own bottega (workshop, sales office, and centre of management) with a fixed core of eight to twelve well-paid technicians and managers monitoring the work of thirty or more unskilled lavoranti (casual workers) at peak times. They entrusted the weaving to master artisans who had several looms run with salaried personnel and worked exclusively for one firm, as well as to small weavers who used only family members. The catasto or tax survey of 1425–27 reveals that over half of the small independent weavers did not even own a loom.49 The situation was similar in the silk industry. In Bologna, Florence, Genoa, Lucca, Milan, Venice, and other major centres merchant-entrepreneurs (setaioli) made extensive use of putting-out. The setaioli purchased the raw materials, coordinated the various stages of the manufacturing process, and exported the finished products. Between the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, they brought the master artisans under almost complete control, such that in most branches of the silk industry master artisans were paid at piecework rates for a setaiolo. In some towns, master weavers retained the right to manufacture independently for sale, but the right was limited to one or two looms that the master had to operate with his family, without the assistance of journeymen or apprentices; the output of all other looms was reserved for the merchant putter-out.50 Silk weavers thus had very limited means for amassing capital and for entrepreneurial initiatives. The consequences of this complete dominance by merchant capital in northern Italy proved very serious during the second half of the seventeenth century, when merchant-entrepreneurs focused increasingly on the preparatory stages of production. The master silk weavers, who lacked control over the production process, were unable to turn the tide, and the centre of the silk weaving industry shifted gradually toward France. Consequently, by 1795 over 95 percent of the silk spun and twisted in Europe was made in Italy, while the manufacture of finished silk fabrics had virtually ceased in Lombardy, Piedmont, the Veneto, and parts of Tuscany.51

Except for London, which was known for the strength of its craft guilds (livery companies), and where the Common Council was even composed of livery representatives at certain times in the fourteenth century,52 English craftsmen remained both economically and politically subordinate until the end of the fifteenth century. Political arrangements in the provincial towns, which were dominated by the commercial elites, were largely hostile to small producers. The weavers’ guilds and other craft organisations were in fact often established through council policy, and the exclusion of master artisans from the wholesale trade in many textile centres is therefore understandable. In Winchester, for example, weavers were allowed to sell their cloths only to merchants in the same city.53 By the late fifteenth century, the balance of power had shifted somewhat, and craftsmen began to emerge in the higher reaches of town government even though the merchants remained effectively in control. When affluent peasants in West Riding, Suffolk, and the West Country established themselves as wool chapmen and began to operate as clothiers, master weavers in the towns were seldom able to adapt to the changed conditions. This was not due to institutional rigidity: the woolen industry was by no means forced out of English towns by corporate restrictions, since local craft guilds never acquired enough political clout even to consider such a strategy, and they were similarly unable to counter the rural cloth industry’s spectacular growth.54

The example of Nuremberg also demonstrates the close interaction between the local balance of power on the one hand and decision-making concerning industrial organisation on the other. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the municipal authorities imposed no restrictions on putting-out by trading firms, but they consistently prohibited horizontal subcontracting by guildsmen, that is, hiring masters who practiced the same trade as subcontractors.55 This policy was probably related to the ban on autonomous associations of craftsmen and to the control exerted by merchants over local politics.56 Still, Nuremberg was exceptional among German export centres, where craft guilds were usually represented on the local councils or at least had some say in the elite’s economic decisions. On the other hand, rural corporations – by no means exceptional in the Holy Roman Empire – were seldom in a position to exert political pressure and were therefore unable to operate as economic counterweights to the trading firms. In a remarkable study on worsted weaving in the W ¨urttemberg Black Forest during the early modern period, Sheilagh Ogilvie has argued that this rural industry’s guildbased organisation harmed the economy in the long run. While this observation may be correct, it should be added that the members of the weavers’ guild had little or no economic leeway: between 1650 and 1797 they were obliged by law to sell their cloths to the merchant company and moreover were required to do so at the official rates; the company had the exclusive right to dye and export the fabrics.57 How could master artisans deal with changing economic conditions in that situation?

The question whether master weavers were capable of becoming entrepreneurs, that is, to set up subcontracting networks and to sell their own manufactures, was therefore closely related to the local balance of power. However, master weavers adjusted to new economic circumstances successfully once both conditions were met.

## Guild-based Textile Trades: Master Artisans as Entrepreneurs

Flexible subcontracting systems were critical for the entrepreneurial success of master artisans in the late medieval Flemish cloth industry. In this respect, the political emancipation of the guilds, both in the big cities and in the many small towns, first in the County of Flanders in the fourteenth century and later in the Duchy of Brabant, was of tremendous importance. Forced to regard autonomous craft guilds as politically significant lobbies, urban magistrates could not systematically subordinate industrial interests to commercial ones. Accordingly, most regulations in the export trades tacitly ignored subcontracting and allowed master artisans to sell their own manufactures, thereby enabling them to accumulate working capital. Master artisans figured prominently in the Bruges cloth industry in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Jos Vermaut has identified four groups of manufacturers with very unequal socio-economic positions: (1) a small number of affluent drapers who purchased their wool from merchants, owned their own workshops, and acted as principal contractors; (2) ‘humble’ drapers who obtained their wool from their more affluent colleagues, but processed their raw materials at their own expense; (3) conventers, master weavers who owned production equipment but were subcontractors in other respects; and (4) proletarianised masters who worked for wages at shops owned by others.58 Conventers were subcontractors, manufacturing cloth at piecework rates for affluent drapers who supplied the wool on credit; like the drapers, most of them employed apprentices and journeymen. The crucial difference between conventers and fully proletarianised masters was that conventers charged drapers master’s wages, while the proletarianised masters received journeymen’s wages. Since drapers were prohibited from having more than four looms in their workshops, no large industrial establishments existed in Bruges; but such corporate restrictions were easily circumvented by using conventers and by the end of the fifteenth century, accordingly, the wool weavers’ guild in Bruges consisted primarily of conventers who worked for a small group of capitalist drapers.

Little conclusive information is yet available about relations between cloth manufacturing groups elsewhere in the late medieval Low Countries, although we do know that subcontracting occurred in several export centres;59 in Leiden, for example, fifty to hundred of the four hundred drapers were responsible for half the total output between 1450 and 1530.60 The general pattern indicates that the most affluent drapers, who supplied the raw materials, used subcontracting to circumvent corporate restrictions on workshop size.61 The dominance of small-scale workshops should therefore not be interpreted automatically as implying the absence of relations of dependence and of a trend towards increased economic concentration, as some have inferred.62

The case of the ‘light drapery’ industry in Lille reveals that capitalist relations did not emerge in all weavers’ guilds in the Low Countries. The enormous expansion of the industry during the first half of the sixteenth century witnessed no parallel increase in scale among firms, and there are no indications that the sayetteurs, the master weavers, resorted to subcontracting. The ability of most small masters in Lille to remain economically independent is probably attributable primarily to their minimal need for capital and credit. In addition to being shorter than the traditional says, the chang´eants and the other new woolen fabrics were far more loosely woven and required only three or four days to manufacture, compared with fifteen days for the traditional pieces. Master artisans involved in the light drapery could therefore purchase small amounts of inexpensive wool every week and quickly recover their investments in raw materials and wages. Moreover, municipal authorities systematically thwarted the efforts of ‘powerful and greedy master artisans’ to circumvent restrictions on workshop size through subcontracting; only exceptionally did they accuse merchants of the same crimes.63 Contrary to the impression conveyed by official rhetoric and by some historians,64 the industrial policy of local authorities was directed more against scale expansion than towards protecting small businesses. The elite opposed concentration of production and labour for fear that more affluent master weavers would become capitalist entrepreneurs and compete with the merchants.65 Similarly, the highly liberal admission policy imposed by Lille’s municipal authorities on the light drapery crafts expresses greater concern for merchant profits than for the small producers’ welfare. Since both men and women could attain master status, admissions dues were minimal and were waived altogether for orphans, and female and child labour was commonplace, the labour market was highly competitive.66 Considering in addition the fact that merchants controlled both imports of raw materials and exports of finished products and thus determined prices on the local market, and given the highly volatile nature of foreign markets, merchants had no reason to get directly involved in manufacturing. They were perfectly happy to limit themselves to ‘exploitation through trade’.67

We have already noted that most German master wool weavers were entitled to subcontract to members of their own guild. Various laws, ranging from complete freedom (which was unusual) to extensive restrictions, regulated the purchase of raw materials and the sale of finished goods. Generally, however, members of export-oriented craft guilds marketed their own product, although in some cases they had to join the mercers’ guild first.68 In late medieval Cologne, the overwhelming majority of master wool weavers worked directly or indirectly for well-to-do peers who supplied the wool – either by purchasing it or by raising sheep – and sold the textiles at the fairs of Frankfurt and Brabant and across Southern Germany, Austria, and Southeast Europe. A few master weavers coordinated the production stages, including the preparatory and finishing work, and set up subcontracting networks in several neighbouring communities.69 Their dominance was attributable in part to their success in convincing the municipal magistrate in 1400 to rule that only members of the weavers’ guild were entitled to subcontract in the wool industry. The Wollenamt had the principle reaffirmed in 1616, as a result of which the role of merchant capital was neutralised in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as well.70

In fourteenth-century Dortmund, the main textile manufacturing centre between the Rhine and the Baltic Sea, wool weavers obtained the right to cut, dye, and finish cloths and, thus, effectively also to trade. No quantitative data are available, but the sources suggest that affluent master artisans used the favourable institutional context to become entrepreneurs, which gave rise to pronounced social contrasts within the guild.71 In Braunschweig, master clothiers were allowed to trade all varieties of textiles they produced from 1245 onward. This gave the more enterprising among them the chance to engage in subcontracting, and by the fifteenth century, when the evidence increases, affluent master clothiers organised most of the production process, including carding, spinning, and fulling in addition to weaving.72 In late medieval Strasbourg, members of the burlers’ guild, who in 1345 were authorised to set up looms at their own workshops and to employ master weavers as subcontractors, ran the cloth industry.73

Master weavers in Augsburg, whose guild was the largest in the city, were able to display their entrepreneurial flair even in such a commercial metropolis. Was it sheer coincidence that Hans Fugger, the progenitor of the famous family of bankers, began as a master fustian weaver during the third quarter of the fourteenth century, and that his descendants joined the merchants’ guild a century later?74 At any rate, affluent master fustian weavers expanded the scale of their operations by subcontracting to poorer peers. They were allowed to trade both their own manufactures and those of subcontractors. Major trading firms, including that of the

Fugger family, are known to have organised fustian production through putting-out in the countryside. In the cities, however, they were subject to all kinds of corporate restrictions, which afforded affluent master artisans considerable space for manoeuvre. In 1610 the weavers’ guild had 2,100 members, over half of which were classified as ‘have-nots’ (habnits), meaning that they were too poor to pay taxes. A tiny minority of the master weavers, however, was very wealthy indeed, most plausibly as a result of extensive subcontracting and trade.75

The analysis of successful craft-based entrepreneurship must obviously not be confined simply to the political and institutional context, however important it may have been. Economic and social conditions merit consideration as well. The wool weavers in fifteenth-century Cologne would have found it much harder to establish subcontracting networks and export their finished goods had they been unable to obtain their wool from the immediate surroundings of the city, and had the fairs of Brabant and Frankfurt not been in such close proximity.76 Between 1250 and 1350, some wool weavers in the Flemish towns might not have succeeded in working their way up to becoming full-scale drapers, that is, industrial coordinators, if the main buyers had not been members of the German Hanseatic League who spent only brief periods in Flanders, and were happy to delegate production to local craftsmen.77 After all, ‘production of cloth for foreign merchants was a complex matter that had to be organised and coordinated by local expert craftsmen who, however dependent they were on outsiders for credit, still played a crucial role in financing cloth production by the multitudes of even poorer artisans and hired hands’.78

The development of relations between different groups of operators in the labour-intensive, guilded branches of the textile industry depended both on political-institutional and on economic factors. Local balances of power, product range, the structure of trade in raw materials and finished goods, market demand, and the relationship between commercial and industrial profits all came into play and complicate identification of general trends. Entrepreneurial initiatives could arise alternatively from merchants and master artisans within the same city, as silk weaving in seventeenth-century Antwerp and in eighteenth-century Lyon illustrates.

After 1585 the manufacture of luxury goods replaced trade as the driving force of Antwerp’s economy. Quality and artistic creativity became of the essence. The more affluent master silk weavers adapted to the new conditions by forming extensive subcontracting networks. In 1610 some of them had seventy to eighty looms operating at the workshops of impoverished colleagues, and by 1684 the overwhelming majority of silk weavers no longer owned their manufacturing equipment and had become totally dependent on a small group of capitalist master artisans. During the first half of the seventeenth century the trading companies had not objected to such concentration, for they were loathe to entrust their valuable silk and silver thread to small producers whose possessions were worth only a fraction of the former’s cost. As international competition heightened and commercial profits dwindled, however, relations between merchants and substantial producers became very tense. Putting-out became more worthwhile for the trading companies, especially since the capitalist silk weavers marketed their output themselves. The merchants accordingly supported the small producers’ protest against the ‘underhanded practices’ of the capitalist weavers, and convinced the city council to take measures to counteract the latter’s power. In 1684 the municipal authorities introduced new limitations on the number of looms per workshop, thereby reverting Antwerp’s incorporated silk industry to ‘small commodity production’ and deferring industrial consolidation to the end of the Ancien R´egime.79

After an extended struggle, the n´egociants (major trading companies) prevailed also in the similarly incorporated silk industry of Lyons. From the end of the seventeenth century they did everything possible to bring master weavers who sold their manufactures independently under control, but they had to wait until 1731 to achieve full victory, when the local authorities banned trade by artisans. The artisan traders, a few hundred of the over three thousand active masters, appealed to the Parliament in Paris to get the ban revoked, but their victory was short-lived. In 1744 the city council issued new regulations that enabled the n´egociants to strengthen their control over producers. During the second half of the eighteenth century the merchant-entrepreneurs replaced the weaver-merchants as the key operators in the silk industry and gradually reduced their former rivals to subcontractors. The n´egociants maintained the cost of a mastership so low that the number of producers rose to nearly seven thousand by the end of the Ancien R´egime and put wages under pressure.80

Linen, as opposed to woolen manufacturing generally offered urban craftsmen entrepreneurial opportunities because they rarely faced competition from merchants, who were interested primarily in the production of coarse linens in the countryside. Flax cultivation was widespread and the raw material was therefore cheap and accessible; weaving a piece of linen took just a few days, allowing production costs to be recovered quickly. This also made it reasonably easy to subcontract and specialise production. From the late seventeenth century Bruges became internationally renowned for striped and chequered, inexpensive linens, known as zingas, used to make garments for workers and sailors. A rapid rise in demand led the more affluent linen weavers to circumvent the corporate restrictions on workshop size by hiring their poorer colleagues as subcontractors (conterbaesen). In the second quarter of the eighteenth century, they expanded their workshops in order to pressure small producers and to reduce piecework rates. In response to immense opposition from the poorer masters, the municipal authorities forced a compromise in 1736 that restricted the number of looms per workshop to ten. Over the following decades, the bankruptcies of several small masters led the five largest yarn traders to support the initiatives of the affluent weavers, who exported their manufactures themselves and demanded full liberalisation of the trade. By 1768, the majority of the small master artisans had lost their independence, leading to the suspension of restrictions on the number of looms. By the end of the Ancien R´egime, some capitalist weavers had thirty, forty, or even fifty journeymen working for them, while most master artisans had no choice but to work as subcontractors for journeyman’s wages.81

The exceptional growth of the incorporated linen-weaving industry in eighteenth-century Antwerp was likewise attributable to the creativity and organisational skills of a few substantial master artisans. Best known among them was Jan van der Smissen, who introduced siamois, a specialty of Rouen, in the mid-1720s. The manufacture of these light and brightly coloured fabrics with a cotton weft and a linen warp met the rising demand among low-income groups for inexpensive fashion-wear and were suitable for mass production. Towards the middle of the eighteenth century, Jan van der Smissen & Sons ran about hundred looms, most of them located in the homes of subcontractors. The firm was so successful that a large bleaching plant was established, where in addition to the firm’s own manufactures, considerable quantities of yarn and fabrics were processed for other companies from the Austrian Netherlands and France.82

## Subcontracting, Product Innovation, and the Rise of Industrial Capitalism

For lack of appropriate data, many essential questions about subcontracting in pre-industrial Europe have to remain as yet unanswered. No sources for comparing the profitability of ‘dispersed manufactories’ and centralised production, for example, are available for any late medieval and early modern textile industry.83 Having said this, subcontracting is compatible with all stages in the development of the capitalist mode of production,84 including the most advanced contemporary forms,85 and is by no means ‘precapitalist’ or inefficient.86

84 Pollard, Genesis, 38–9. See also Raphael Samuel, ‘Workshop of the World: Steam Power and Hand Technology in Mid-Victorian Britain’, History Workshop 3 (1977), 6–72; Charles Sabel and Jonathan Zeitlin, ‘Historical Alternatives to Mass Production: Politics, Markets and Technology in Nineteenth-Century Industrialization’, Past and Present 108 (1985), 133–76; J. H. Quataert, ‘A New View of Industrialization: “Proto-Industry” or the Role of Small-scale, Labor-intensive Manufacture in the Capitalist Environment’, International Labor and Working-Class History 33 (1988), 3–22; Maxine Berg, ‘Small Producer Capitalism in Eighteenth-Century England’, Business History 35 (1993), 19–20, 25–6; Pat Hudson, The Industrial Revolution (London: Edward Arnold, 1992), chs. 1 and 2; Crossick, ‘Past Masters’, 27–8, 30–32.

The available information does permit tentative conclusions about the extent to which subcontracting allowed craftsmen to become industrial entrepreneurs. Scholars working on guild-based export trades in premodern Europe have long argued that corporatism, rigid regulations, limited competition, small-scale production, and economic inflexibility were interrelated. While research over the past few decades has modified these views, an adequate explanation has yet to be found as to why urban corporatism was conducive to or at least compatible with industrial growth in some cases but not in others. Part of the reason is that much of the more recent research, like its predecessors, is inclined to embrace a timeless definition of corporatism that allows little or no consideration for the divergent economic consequences of different political and social power relations. Research on subcontracting reveals that rather than focusing exclusively on the presence or absence of certain forms of industrial regulation, we should explore who set which rules within which institutional framework with consideration for the economic, social, and political contexts.

Although current historical research has yet to provide a general interpretation, it clearly indicates that subcontracting was widespread in guildbased export trades in different parts of western Europe from the late Middle Ages onwards. The image of the small, independent urban producer in these sectors is often a merely idealised construction that many historians have readily accepted, because they have assumed that only merchants launched entrepreneurial initiatives (especially through rural ‘putting-out’), and because in most cases the official sources record the existence of small urban workshops without mentioning the networks of centrally coordinated ‘dispersed manufactories’ in which they were embedded. Such subcontracting arrangements rested on a wide variety of socio-economic relationships, ranging from cooperation between equal partners to virtual subjugation of proletarianised producers. However, labour-intensive export trades were nearly always strongly hierarchical.

Flexible subcontracting enabled master artisans to achieve economies of scale and become capitalist entrepreneurs, despite the restrictions on workshop size that remained in effect in most craft guilds until the end of the Ancien R´egime. In addition to minimising investments in fixed capital, accommodating fluctuations in market demand and passing most of the risks on to small masters, this method of industrial organisation promoted the division of labour and specialisation, raised the productivity of labour, and kept wage rates low.

Precisely because so many, often conflicting interests were at stake, the rise of subcontracting in urban textile industries was never straightforward. It is true that merchants often had no objection to guilds in urban export industries and in some cases even urged that official craft guilds be established. All kinds of factors came into play, of which quality control was among the most significant.87 Nonetheless, trading companies were just as keen to suppress the emergence of competing groups of capitalist entrepreneurs. Wherever possible they tried to control the labour-intensive and guild-based export trades by preventing craftsmen from subcontracting and trading their own wares. This explains why, in the event of conflicts between affluent and less wealthy masters, merchant capitalists nearly always supported less wealthy masters and urged the authorities to take measures to protect small workshops.

It is no coincidence that in the United Provinces, where merchant capitalism peaked during the seventeenth century, the main export trades (including Leiden’s textile industry) were never incorporated, although official craft guilds were established in many other sectors.88 Given the overwhelming economic preponderance and political clout of the large trading firms, master craftsmen in the few existing guilded export industries had few opportunities to accumulate working capital. In protecting small master artisans by restricting workshop size and banning subcontracting, the municipal authorities served the interests of the putting-out merchants.89

Flanders and Brabant were not, of course, the absolute opposite of Holland as far as relations between urban export industries and craft guilds was concerned. In some sectors, such as fustian weaving in Bruges,90 craft guilds were never established, while in others their establishment initially served the interests of merchant-entrepreneurs, as was the case with silk weaving in sixteenth-century Antwerp.91 Nonetheless, the long-term growth of most urban export industries in the southern Netherlands was not based primarily on the strength of merchant capital, but can be attributed to the early and uninterrupted presence of substantial master artisans. These craftsmen deployed guild by-laws and regulations to keep merchant capitalists out of direct involvement in manufacturing and, conversely, made extensive use of subcontracting as a means of industrial expansion thanks to the fact that the municipally approved guild statutes tacitly overlooked the practice. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, under pressure from the craft guilds, the municipal authorities of Flanders and Brabant systematically denied requests from the large trading firms in Antwerp to exclude producers from certain market sectors; in the ‘trade metropolis of the West’, every citizen had the right to import and export wholesale, provided that he or she observed the government and town laws.92 The situation was similar in Ghent: even after Charles V revoked the privileges of most craft guilds in 1540, master artisans engaged in guild-based export trades were allowed to continue selling their own goods.93

Clearly, any conclusion regarding the economic significance of urban corporatism needs to consider the issue of market access, which was crucial for guild members to become entrepreneurs. The combination of subcontracting and trade enabled more affluent master artisans to accumulate the working capital that greatly facilitated industrial innovation. Thus, the successive cycles of product innovation and product differentiation in the late medieval and early modern Southern Netherlands were initiated by master artisans rather than by merchant capitalists.94 This held true both for cycles driven by luxury goods and for those driven by products for mass consumption. In some cases, as with Van der Smissen’s siamois, the new manufactures were imitations of goods produced nearby or abroad. At other times, they were entirely new products, as the Bruges zingas illustrate.

During the pre-industrial period, product innovation usually prevailed over process innovation in both guild-based and non-corporate consumer manufactures for export, and irrespective of whether master artisans or merchants were in control.95 For this reason, corporatism cannot be deemed incompatible with technological change: until well into the nineteenth century, process innovation remained exceptional in most branches of industry, regardless of their organisational structure. Moreover, ‘tacit’ technical innovations and changes based to a large extent on labour experience had a greater impact than is often assumed.96 It is quite possible that the development of subcontracting networks was conducive to such processes of learning by doing and by using.

Some authors have argued that the quality inspections that the corporate organisations required were more of a hindrance than a help to the introduction of new manufactures,97 but Reinhold Reith has rightly noted that most manufactures had only to meet minimum standards. This meant that various levels of quality of the same manufacture could be available on the market. In Augsburg in the 1580s, for example, pieces of fustian were sealed according to their quality; the better the quality, the more seals were affixed. While four seals denoted ‘very high’ quality, the top grades received up to eight seals.98 Moreover, the formation of vast subcontracting networks coordinated by affluent master artisans made product innovation highly compatible with quality inspection. It was no coincidence that Jan van der Smissen, who had a great many subcontractors working for him and successfully launched a new, mixed fabric, siamois, was dean of the Antwerp linen weavers’ guild and as such controlled the craft’s administrative and related matters.99

Having said this, it is clear that urban corporatism combined with subcontracting and market access were not indispensable for achieving industrial growth in general or product innovation in particular. The case of England, where many craft guilds gradually lost their economic significance from the late seventeenth century onwards, proves that a growth in industrial demand could be met in other ways as well. Our claim here is that guilded export trades would be innovative if and only if these two conditions – the opportunity for masters to engage in subcontracting and in trade – were met.

Finally, does the study of subcontracting in guild-based export industries reveal whether corporatism was compatible with capitalism? The answer depends on the specific type of corporatism and capitalism concerned.100 Here, the ‘two paths’ theory is useful, as derived from Volume III, Chapter XX of Capital, in which Karl Marx attributes the ‘true revolutionary transformation’ of industrial production to entrepreneurs coming from the ranks of former craftsmen. According to this perspective, elaborated by Maurice Dobb and Kohachiro Takahashi, the ‘really revolutionary way’, where ‘the producer becomes a merchant and capitalist’, differs from the second path, where ‘the merchant takes possession in a direct way of production’, using the existing mode of production as its premise and eventually becoming ‘an obstacle to the breakthrough of a capitalist mode of production’.101 According to Takahashi, the ‘two paths’ are not two solutions to the same problem; they serve the opposing interests and objectives of different social groups.102 The available data reveal that the historical reality is more complex than the theory suggests: the early factory owners came from a wide variety of professional and social backgrounds.103 Nonetheless, it is also true that the interests of merchant entrepreneurs rarely coincided with those of affluent master artisans in the export trades. The prevalence of either of the two groups would indeed have different economic consequences. Merchant entrepreneurs preferred the putting-out system, which implied the persistent dependence of industry on commercial gain from arbitrage (‘buy low to sell high’). Well-to-do master artisans, however, benefited more from subordinating commercial capital to industrial capital and from changing the traditional relations of production. Corporate regulations that deprived producers of the right to subcontract and market their own manufactures were therefore perfectly compatible with the supremacy of commercial capital.104 This type of corporatism impeded the emergence of industrial capitalists. On the other hand, if master artisans achieved economies of scale despite the opposition of merchant capitalists, a capitalist element that was half-manufacturer and half-merchant might emerge within corporate organisations, and industrial growth would not depend exclusively on the logic of the circulating capital. In such cases corporatism did not exclude the rise of industrial capitalism.
