> 来源：William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement a design source book (Parry, Linda etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement a design source book (Parry, Linda etc.)\William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement a design source book (Parry, Linda etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Textiles of the American Arts and Crafts Movement

When the Arts and Crafts movement crossed the Atlantic Ocean to the United States, several aspects changed, or at least took on a different emphasis. The American movement both developed after the British one was well established and continued later into the twentieth century. In Britain the First World War was undoubtedly a factor in putting an abrupt and definitive end to the movement. In the States, the war did not interrupt the pattern of domestic life as dramatically as it did in England, allowing the movement to continue for a longer length of time.

The Arts and Crafts movement occurred at a time when Americans were insecure about their own tastes in terms of design. Most Americans felt that European products and designs adapted from seventeenth and eighteenth century examples were preferable to contemporary American work. The decorator and designer Candace Wheeler observed' that although silk weaving was practised in the States, patterned fabrics were copied from textiles made in other countries and were sold as English or French rather than American.

One of the major differences in the two countries as far as textiles are concerned, was the role taken by manufacturers. In the United States most manufacturers of patterned fabric were not readily prepared to produce new designs for the higher priced market. They preferred to copy or adapt a design which had already proven to be successful. Wallpaper manufacturers, on the other hand, seemed more willing to use American designers.

Englishmen were often quoted on the subject of design in the American book and magazine press. The names of John Ruskin and William Morris were frequently evoked, sometimes incorrectly. Oscar Wilde, C.R. Ashbee and Walter Crane, all Englishmen who had visited the States, had both influenced and perhaps in turn been influenced by Americans. Eventually both Ruskin's point of view - that of copying directly from nature - and the point of view of Christopher Dresser, William Morris and Henry Cole - that of abstracting flat pattern from nature  were seen in American products. Often the same person or organization did both types of designs. For example, textiles designed by Associated Artists, and by the Deerfield designers Margaret Whiting and Ellen Miller, could be either simple drawings of familiar plants put into repeat, or stylized and abstracted designs. Flat areas of abstracted pattern were often found on the walls of a home, on commercially prepared wallpapers and in stencilled designs.

The American response to the Arts and Crafts movement was neither a mirror image of the British movement nor a colonization. The movement took its own form. The United States was a much younger country and was in a different stage of its own development, historically and economically. The exhortation, from design reformers, to look around oneself and to take inspiration from nature delighted most Americans with its implications of freedom and independence, and vaguely disturbed them because of their lack of self confidence in design issues.

From the beginning there were confusions and contradictions both with what the style looked like and with the various philosophies associated with the movement. The rhetoric of the social reformers and the guidelines of Arts and Crafts exhibition juries were often contradictory. A devotion to the abstract ideal of beauty did not always correlate with social responsibility. Romantic ideals about the artist/craftsman often did not fit with reality. And, an essential contradiction, that while massproduced objects can be marketed at low cost, few handmade products are within the reach of people with a moderate income, was never surmounted.

It was difficult for manufacturers who were interested in maximum profits to incorporate social reform within the factory. Yet they wished to have the Arts and Crafts consumer as a customer. Thus a number of products were created for the Arts and Crafts consumer under factory conditions that did not meet with the Arts and Crafts ideal.

Just as in Britain, the movement existed for many years before it received the name "Arts and Crafts", and that phrase was not always adopted enthusiastically. "Craftsman" and "Mission Style" were two other frequently used terms. In the United States the term Arts and Crafts became associated with the individual working at home and with the societies formed as exhibitions and sales organizations rather than with manufacturers.

Within the Arts and Crafts societies many individuals worked on small, non-essential decorative objects such as wastepaper baskets or embroideries from a kit, feeling they were involved with design reform. Handwork, while absorbing of creative energies, rarely produced much income, causing it to become a leisure activity or hobby. By the early 1920s most of the practitioners must have realized that the ideal of the craftsman, in terms of forming self-supporting communities of artists and craftsmen, was impossible in an industrialized society. Yet the work of individual craftspeople, working from their own studios, continued.

The domestic nature of the movement was always important. Products were designed for the home, the writings of the period put emphasis upon creating beautiful and simple domestic surroundings and much of the work there was done by females. The home itself was to make a statement about ideals of beauty and simplicity. In the American movement a number of the best known names were women: Candace Wheeler, Margaret Whiting, Ellen Miller, Lydia Bush-Brown and many of the ceramicists such as Adelaide Alsop Robineau.

It is curious to note that textiles per se were not very important in American Arts and Crafts interiors. Both the architecture and the furniture were meant to dominate the look of a room with their prominent use of wood and their strong horizontals and verticals. Yet textiles were extremely important in the growth of the movement. The techniques of embroidery, appliqué, stencilling and block printing provided an opportunity for individual expression within the reach of the average person who had some creative ability and a desire to participate in beautifying their own surroundings. Many textile products were one-of-a-kind pieces, not production work.

William Morris's products appealed to Americans. By the 1880s Morris fabrics and wallpapers were available for sale in many of the larger cities in the States. In Chicago, Morris fabrics were used in 1886 in the lavish and imposing house which H.H. Richardson designed for John Glessner and his family. John Glessner later wrote that the pattern on one of the silks was drawn by Morris himself and that much of the embroidery was done by Mrs. Glessner2.

Early examples of the thinking found in the Arts and Crafts movement were seen in the work of Associated Artists, founded in 1879 by Louis Comfort Tiffany (18481933), Samuel Colman (18321920), Lockwood de Forest (18501932) and Candace Wheeler (18281923) as an interior decorating firm. In her autobiography, Yesterdays in a busy Life, Candace Wheeler quotes Tiffany as saying to her, "We are going after the money there is in art but art is there all the same" Within the organization it was Mrs. Wheeler who was in charge of choosing and supplying the woven textiles and embroideries. In 1883 the partnership dissolved so that each member could pursue his or her own interests. Mrs. Wheeler kept the name, Associated Artists, using the argument that she had thought it up in the first place. Tiffany took the name "Tiffany Associates". Along with his well known work in glass, he continued to decorate interiors, including many churches.

Between 1883 and 1907 the association was run by Candace Wheeler, one of her daughters and later by one of her sons. The Associated Artists designed, printed and wove textiles, many of which were produced by the firm of Cheney Brothers in South Manchester, Connecticut (8286). Several members of the Cheney family and the Wheeler family were close friends and the professional relationship may have developed out of the personal relationship.

Associated Artists worked with Frank and Knight Cheney to use patterns drawn by American designers, many taken from very familiar and easily recognizable plants, for printed and woven fabrics. The printed fabrics can be identified by a monogram of a double capital letter A incorporated within the design (83, 84a, 84b) but the monogram was not included in the woven fabrics. Some of the Associated Artists fabrics were used in the Mark Twain house in Hartford, Connecticut, and in Andrew Carnegie's house in the Berkshires.

The reasons why the firm closed in 1907 remain unclear. It does not appear as if there was a continuation of the work by another parallel organization. But Candace Wheeler's ideas, those of using the simple and familiar as design sources and creating practical products, reached into another generation by her teaching at Cooper Union and by her writings in women's magazines and in books.

One of the best known and most successful examples of a number of small societies which sprang up around the country in response to the desire for design reform was the one in Deerfield, Massachusetts. In 1896 the Society of Blue and White Needlework was started by Ellen Miller (18541929) and Margaret Whiting . Wheeler, ibid. p.232.

(18601946), both residents of Deerfield, a small town in the northwestern part of the state. At first the society adapted designs found on eighteenth century embroideries in Massachusetts, embroidering with blue and white yarns on white foundation cloth. But within a few years they were embroidering with multi-colored yarns on colored cloths and had added the technique of appliqué to their work (85a). They also began to use contemporary designs. Subtle toning and unexpected color combinations became associated with this group.

A capital letter 'D' within a spinning wheel, the trademark of the society, was embroidered on each piece the Society of Blue and White Needlework completed. Often the trademark was cleverly incorporated into the design and is not immediately visible (85a). Nothing but finished work was sold by the society even though there were requests for both stamped fabrics which the purchaser could embroider and for the dyed yarns. Work of the society was often shown in Arts and Crafts exhibitions in cities such as Boston, New York, and Chicago, and the society received favorable press attention.

Margaret Whiting, who had stated that she had founded her society on principles set down by Ruskin² clearly saw the confusion which resulted when social reform was combined with design reform. "Village industries are menaced by the danger of confusing social reform with craftsmanship. It is not charity but art which founds and maintains a craft."5 The society continued in operation until 1926 when the deaths of some members and the failing eyesight of others caused it to close.

In 1901 Gustave Stickley (18581942), who operated the Craftsman Workshops for furniture just outside Syracuse, New York, started a magazine, The Craftsman. The magazine contained articles of interest to the Arts and Crafts community and has come to be widely quoted and cited. Articles included a discussion of William Morris by Irene Sargent, an examination of Stickley's home and Craftsman workshops, home training in woodwork, articles on the American Indian, and on California's contribution to a national architecture.

The Craftsman shops first sold furniture and metalwork but the firm also sold imported and domestic textiles. Rugs came from Ireland and India and American textiles were available as well. Stamped embroideries in the form of kits for the purchaser to complete were among the products available at Craftsman shops. In all the Stickley furniture, structure and the grain of the wood was important. It was intended that the furniture be used with textiles which conveyed the same robust and strong quality. Stickley adherents favored table runners and cushions made of linen or jute where the weave of the foundation cloth was apparent. Designs for these articles often appeared in The Craftsman (88).

Batik was a textile craft to which Americans responded enthusiastically within this period. The craft consisted in drawing on cloth with wax, then immersing the fabric in dyes which resisted the waxed areas. Batik had been brought to the Netherlands from the Dutch East Indies and spread to other parts of Europe. Early in the twentieth century the Dutch artist Peter Mijer brought the technique to the United States. Mijer collaborated with American artists and wrote a book outlining the technique6.

In the 1910s and 1920s batik was frequently practised in the eastern half of the United States. A reviewer wrote of an 1917 exhibition in New York, "The majority of the exhibits are in batik which appears to have fascinated the whole artistic population of Greenwich Village and the outlying provinces of New York's Bohemian world"7. Artists such as Arthur Crisp and Lydia Bush-Brown (90a and 90b) produced large hangings used as wall decorations in homes and hotels and other public spaces. Shawls and articles of wearing apparel were also made. Art magazines such as Amy Mali Hicks's "Batik, its making and its use" showed examples of the work and shelter magazines spread the craft to a wider audience.8

Lydia Bush-Brown (1887-1984) trained as a decorative artist at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York. In her youth she travelled extensively in Europe and in the Middle East, always making sketches of the country in which she was staying. When she returned to the States she studied principles of dyeing with Charles Pellow, a chemist at Columbia University. Using batik she made dresses, cloaks and scarves to order and then made larger batik hangings for the walls of residences and offices. Her very poetic approach to her subjects was always apparent.

She worked on commission, repeating her designs in different color schemes if a customer wished it. Her batiks were shown in galleries and in exhibitions and were often illustrated in magazines where they were favorably described9. In 1923 she was awarded the Medal of Honor by the Boston Arts and Crafts Society.

The textile techniques of block printing (91a and 91b) and stencilling were not only practised by artists but also were explained in a how-to-do-it format to the interested in magazines such as American Homes and Gardens and The House Beautifullo. Block printing and stencilling on fabric were crafts that the aware homeowner could be expected to use for him or herself. Yet how much block printing and stencilling was done by people who had not gone to art school remains an unanswered question.

Art schools and art classes began to appear in greater number across the entire country. The art school of the H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College in New Orleans, Louisiana, began in 1894 with pottery and later expanded to include the crafts of weaving (92), embroidery, metalwork and bookbinding. The products and the name of the school were known nationally because of the number of exhibitions which the school entered.

As a way of life the Arts and Crafts movement failed to live up to the visionary ideals of its early adherents; much of the work shown at their exhibitions lacked the elements of good design and the phrase itself gradually acquired a pejorative tone.

But the Arts and Crafts movement as it existed in this country at the turn of the century left a legacy: the work of individual craftsmen improved: in the years after the First World War a number of craftspeople such as Lydia Bush-Brown and Edith Huntington Snow (d.1960) (93) set up their own studios and produced well made products of good design.

Gillian Moss

Assistant Curator of Textiles Cooper-Hewitt Museum The Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Design New York

Mabel Tuke Priestman "How to make and apply Stencils", American Homes and Gardens, February 1906, pp.104/106.
