> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1. Early Writing: Mark-making, Notation Systems, and Scripts

Christin, Anne Marie, ed. The History of Writing. Paris: Flammarion, 2001.

Crystal, David. Encyclopedia of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Fischer, Steven Roger. A History of Language. London: Reaktion Books, 1999.

Gaur, Albertine. A History of Writing. London: British Museum Books, 1984.

Gelb, Ignace. A Study of Writing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952.

Healey, John F. The Early Alphabet. London: British Museum Publications, 1990.

Kenyon, Sir Frederic. Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts. New York: Harper and Brothers, Publishers, 1958.

Moore, Oliver. Reading the Past: Chinese. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2000.

Naveh, Joseph. Early History of the Alphabet. Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1982

Sampson, Geoffrey. Writing Systems. Stanford,A: Stanford University Press,

Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. How Writing Came About. Austin, TX: University of Texas, 1996.

Senner, Wayne M. The Origins of Writing. Lincoln, NE: The University of Nebraska Press, 1989.

## Classical Literacy

Avrin, Leila. Scribes, Script, and Books. Chicago: American Library Association and London: The British Library, 1991.

Bischoff, Bernard. Latin Paleography: Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Briquel, Dominique. "The Script of Ancient Italy." In Anne-Marie Christin, ed. A History of Writing. Paris: Flammarion, 2001.

Dobias-Lalou, Catherine. "The Greek Alphabets." In Anne-Marie Christin, ed. A History of Writing. Paris: Flammarion, 2001.

Gray, Nicolete. A History of Lettering. Boston: David R. Godine, 1986.

Knight, Stan. Historical Scripts: From Classical Times to the Renaissance. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press, 1998.

Mason, William. A History of the Art of Writing. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1928.

Petrucci, Armando. Public Lettering. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
