> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 8. Formations of the Modern Movement

Banham, Reyner. Theory and Design in the First Machine Age. London: Architectural Press, 1960.

Baroni, Daniele, and Antonio D'Auria. Kolo Moser. New York: Rizzoli, 1984.

Bruckner, D. J. R. Fredric Goudy. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1990.

Buck-Morss, Susan. The Dialectics of Seeing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

Crane, Walter. Line and Form. London: G. Bell and Sons, Ltd. 1925.

Goudy, Fredric. Goudy's Type Designs [Complete]. New Rochelle, NY: Myriade, 1946

Jones, Owen. The Grammar of Ornament, originally published in 1856. New York: Dover Publications, 1987.

Louis, Eleonora, ed. Secession: The Vienna Secession from Temple of Art to Exhibition Hall. Stuttgart: Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1997.

Massey, Anne. Interior Design of the 2Oth Century. London: Thames and Hudson, 1990.

Müller-Brockmann, Josef. History of the Poster. Zurich: ABC Verlag, 1971.

Peterson, William S. The Kelmscott Press. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1991

Pevsner, Nicolas. Pioneers of the Modern Movement. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1949.

Taylor, John Russell. The Art Nouveau Book in Britain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966.

Weisberg, Gabriel P., Edwin Becker, and Évelyne Possémé. The Origins of L'Art Nouveau: The Bing Empire. Amsterdam: Van Gogh Museum, 2005.

Weisser, Michael. Im Stil der "Jugend." Frankfurt: Verlag Fricke, 1979.

Wilhide, Elizabeth. The Mackintosh Style. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1995.

Windsor, Alan. Peter Behrens, Architect and Designer. New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1981.
