> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 9. Innovation and Persuasion

Blotkamp, Carl, et al. De Stijl:The Formative Years. Translated by Charlotte and Arthur Loeb. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.

Dickerson, Leah. Building the Collective. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996.

Dcer, JhaaThe ise Wor: oden r Experenal Tpoay 1909-1923. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Guggenheim Museum. The Great Utopia. New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1992.

Kandinsky, Wassily. Point and Line to Plane. New York: Dover, 1979. Reprint of 1947 edition published by the Solomon Guggenheim Museum.

Lavi MaudCut with a Kitchen Kni. New Haven,: Yale University ress, 1993.

arolnVicgtohicgniiicg 1997.

McLean, Ruari. Jan Tschichold, Typographer. Boston: David R. Godine, 1975.

Meggs, Philip, and Rob Carter. Typographic Specimens: The Great Typefaces. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993.

Museum of Modern Art. Aleksandr Rodchenko. New York: Musuem of Modern Art, 1998.

Museum of Modern Art. Bauhaus: 1919-1928. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1993.

Rothenstein, Julian, and Mel Gooding. ABZ More Alphabets and Other Signs. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2003.

Spencer, Herbert. The Liberated Page. San Francisco: Bedford Press, 1987.

Spencer, Herbert. Pioneers of Modern Typography. London: Lund Humphries, 1969.
