> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 15. Digital Design

Greene, Rachel. Internet Art. London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 2004.

Poggenpohl, Sharon. Graphic Design: Computer Graphics, special issue of Visible Language, Volume IX, Number 2, Spring 1985.

Reichardt, Jasia. The Computer in Art. London: Studio Vista, 1971.

Richin, Fred. In Our Own Image. New York: Aperture, 1990.

Siegel, David. Creating Killer Web Sites. Indianapolis: Hayden Books, 1996.

Würtz, Elizabeth. A Cross-Cultural Analysis of Websites from High-Context and Low-Context Cultures, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(1), article 1,http:/jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue1/wuertz.html (accessed January 1, 2007).

## General References

Audin, Maurice. Histoire de L'Imprimerie. Paris: A. and J. Picard, 1972.

Bierut, Michael, with William Drenttel, Steven Heller, and DK Holland, eds. L Coria i Gph eserA 1994.

Bierut, Michael, with William Drenttel, Steven Heller, and DK Holland, eds. Looig Closer:Critical Writings on Graphic Design. New York: Alworth Press, 1997.

Bierut, Michael, with Jessica Helfand, Steven Heller, and Rick Poynor, eds. CloCss r G  A 1999.

Bierut, Michael, with William Drenttel and Steven Heller, eds. Looking Closer 4: Criical Writings on Graphic Design. New York: Alworth Press, 00.

Bigelow, Charles, with Paul Hayden Duensing and Linnea Gentry, eds. Fine Print on Type. San Francisco: Bedford Arts, 1989.

Blackwel, Lewis. 2Oth-Century Type. New Haven, : Yale University Press, 2004.

Booth-Clibborn, Edward, and Daniele Baroni. The Language of Graphics. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1979.

Calhoun, Craig. Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.

Carter, Sebastien. 20th Century Type Designs. London: Lund Humphries, 1987.

Craig, James, and Bruce Barton. Thirty Centuries of Graphic Design. New York: Watson Guptill Publications, 1987.

Curwen, Harold. Processes of Graphic Reproduction in Printing. London: Faber and Faber, 1934.

Daniels, Peter T., and William Bright. The World's Writing Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Febvre, Lucien, and Henri-Jean Martin. The Coming of the Book. London: Verso, 1976.

Friedman, Mildred. Graphic Design in America. Minneapolis, MN: Walker Art Center and New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1989.

Gallo, Max. The Poster in History. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1972.

Gascoigne, Bamber. How to Identify Prints. London: Thames and Hudson, 1986.

Hamilton, Frederick. Books Before Typography. Chicago: United Typothetae of America, 1918.

Harris, Neil. Cultural Excursions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Heller, Steven, with Karre Jacobs, Mary Siskin, and Anne Fink. Angry Graphics: os  the Reanush aSalt ake ity erei Books, 1992.

Heller, Steven, and Karen Pomeroy, eds. Design Literacy: Understanding Graphic Design. New York: Allworth Press, 1997.

Heller, Steven, and Anne Fink. Faces on the Edge: Type in the Digital Age. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1997.

Heller, Steven, and Seymour Chwast. Graphic Style. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1988

Hollis, Richard. Graphic Design: A Concise History. London: Thames and Hudson, 1994.

Hornung, Clarence, and Fridolf Johnson. 200 Years of American Graphic Arts. New York: Braziller, 1976.

Hutchinson, James. Letters. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983.

Jean, Georges. Writing: The Story of Alphabets and Scripts. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1987.

Jussim, Estelle. Visual Communication and the Graphic Arts. New York: R.R. Bowker, 1983.

Kinross, Robin. Modern Typography. London: Hyphen Press, 2004.

Lawson, Alexander. Anatomy of a Typeface. Jaffrey, NH: David Godine, 1990.

Lupton, Ellen, and J. Abbott Miller. Design Writing Research. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996.

Margolin, Victor, ed. Design Discourse: History/Theory/Criticism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design, 2nd edition. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992.

Myers, Robin, and Michael Harris. A Millennium of the Book. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press and Winchester, UK: St. Paul's Bibliographies, 1994.

Perfect, Christopher, and Jeremy Austen. The Complete Typographer. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice HalI, 1992.

Pope, Daniel. The Making of Modern Advertising. New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1983.

Poynor, Rick, and Edward Booth-Clibborn. Typography Now. London: Internos Books, 1991.

Presbrey, Frank. The History and Development of Advertising. New York: Doubleday, Doran and Company, 1929.

Steinberg, S.H. Five Hundred Years of Printing. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press and London: The British Library, 1996.

Thomas, Isaiah. The History of Printing in America. New York: Weathervane Books, 1970.

Updike, Daniel Berkeley. Printing Types: Their History, Forms, and Use. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1937.

## Image Credits

## Prelude

Figure 0.1: Jean Vertut/Yvonne Vertut; Figure 0.2: Map of Human Origins, page 124, from The First Humans (The Illuminated History of Humankind, V. 1), by Goran Burenhult, General Editor. Copyright © 1993 by Weldon Owen PTY. Ltd./Bra Brocker AB. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers; Figure 0.3: Loic Hamon/Art Resource/ Réunion des Musées Nationaux; Figure 0.4: Ali Meyer/The Bridgeman Art Library International; Figure 0.5: Bison from the Altamira Caves, Upper Paleolithic, c. 15000-8000 BC (cave painting) by Prehistoric © Altamira, Spain/Giraudon/ The Bridgeman Art Library; Figure 0.6: © Copyright The Trustees of The British Museum.
