> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 6

Figure 6.1: Bibliotheque Nationale de France; Figure 6.2a: National Portrait Gallery, London; Figure 6.2b: © Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy; Figure 6.3a: Printed Ephemera by John Lewis (Dover 1962)/Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 6.3b: The Granger Collection, New York; Figure 6.3c: Printed Ephemera by John Lewis (Dover 1962)/Courtesy of the Library f Congress; Figure 6.4: The Penny Sunday Chronicle, 1842 -Sensationalizing the plight of the working class. From page 81 of The Press and Popular Culture by Martin Conboy, 2002. Courtesy of Sage Pubications; Figure 6.5: Columbia University Libraries/ColumbiaUniversity; Figure 6.6: The Illustrated London News Picture Library; Figure 6.7: By permission of The British Library; Figure 6.8a: Bowen, Abel. The Young Lady's Book; a manual of elegant recreations, exercises and pursuits. London: Vizetelly, Branston, and Co. 1829. Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina; Figure 6.8b: Rare Book Division, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations; Figure 6.9: The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations; Figure 6.10: University of Virginia Library, Special Collections Department; Figure 6.11: The Granger Collection, New York; Figure 6.12: Les Arts Decoratifs, Musée de la Publicite, Paris. Photos Laurent Sully Jaulmes. Tous droits reserves; Figure 6.13: Tyne Bridge Publishing; Figure 6.14a: The Granger Collection; Figure 6.14b: Musée de la Ville de Paris, Musée Carnavalet, Paris, France/The Bridgeman Art Library; Figure 6.15: © Judith Miller/ Dorling Kindersle/Anastacias Antiques; Figure 6.16a: The Granger Collection; Figure 6.16b: Printed Ephemera by John Lewis (Dover, 1962) /Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 6.17a: Clarence P. Hornung, Handbook of Early Advertising Art, page xiv. (Dover 1947); Figure 6.17b, c: Printed Ephemera by John Lewis (Dover 1962)/Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 6.18: The Amusement French School (19th century). Musée de la Ville de Paris, Musée Carnavalet, Paris, France/Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library; Figure 6.19a: Plenum Publishig Corain Fiure 6.: Plenum Publishing Corporation; Figure 6.19c: Plenum Publishing Corporation; Figure 6.20: 1981.54.2 - Felix Octavius Carr [No. 5] Scenes from Indian Life. Lithograph, 1843, 7 × 9 inches. Amon Carter Museum, Fort Worth, Texas; Figure 6.21: Eugene (Ferdinand Victor) Delacroix (1798-1863), "First Meeting between

Faust and Mephistopheles: "Why all this Noise?'". From Goethe's Faust, 1828. Illustration, Lithograph. Private Collection. The Stapleton Collection. The Bridgeman Art Library; Figure 6.22: Yale Center for British Art, Paul Mellon Collection, USA The Bridgeman Art Library International; Figure 6.23: www.CartoonStock.com; Figure 6.24: Columbia University Libraries/ Columbia University; Figure 6.25a: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 6.25b: William Hone Collection, Special Collections, Adelphi Universities Libraries.
