> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 8

Figure 8.1: University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents/Digital Library for the Decorative Arts and Material Culture: Image and Text Collections; Figure 8.2: Glasgow University Library; Figure 8.3: King's College London, University of London; Figure 8.4: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 8.5a: © Yale Center for British Art, Paul Mellon Collection, USA The Bridgeman Art Library; Figure 8.5b: reproduced by permission of The Huntington Library, San Marino, California; Figure 8.7: National Archives and Records Administration; Figure 8.8a: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 8.8b: ©Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery, University of Glasgow; Figure 8.9: Les Arts Décoratifs. Musée de la Publicité, Paris. Photo: Laurent Sully Jaulmes. Tous droits reserves; Figure 8.10a: Les Arts Décoratifs. Musée de la Publicité, Paris. Photo: Laurent Sully Jaulmes. Tous droits reserves; Figure 8.10b: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 8.11a: General Electric Company; Figure 8.11b: Ornamental motifs published in "Ver Scarum" in 1899, from page 123 of "Kolo Moser: Graphic Artist and Designer" by Daniele Baroni and Antonio D'Auria. Courtesy of Rizzoli International Publications, Inc.; Figure 8.12a: IMAGNO/Austrian Archives; Figure 8.12b: Klingspor-Museum; Figures 8.13, 8.14 a, b: Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY; Figure 8.14c: Private Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library International; Figure 8.15: IMAGNO/Austrian Archives; Figure 8.16: AKG-Images; Figure 8.17: John Hay Library, Brown University; Figure 8.18: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 8.1: Courtesy of the Library of Congress, Pforzheimer-Rogers Collection, Rare Book and Special Collections Division; Figure 8.20a: Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections, Cornell University Library; Figure 8.20b: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 8.21: Henry van de Velde, Gebrauchsgraphik Tropon EiweiBnahrung Karl Ernst Osthaus Museum der Stadt Hagen; Figure 8.22: National Archives

and Records Administration; Figure 8.23: Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz/Art Resource, NY; Figure 8.24a: Courtesy of Klingspor-Museum, Offenbach, Germany; iure 8.24b: Courtesy f the Library Congress; Figure 8.25: Historisches Museum Der Stadt Wein.
