> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 9

Figure 9.1: Bauhaus poster for Kandinsky exhibition designed by Herbert Bayer 1926. Bayer, Herbert (1900-1985) @ ARS, NY Kandinsky zum 60. Geburtstag. Offset lithograph, printed i c, 19 x 25". Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Alfred H. Barr, Jr. (109.1968); Figure 9.2: Sunset ie; Fiu9.:Liss, Beat he Whites with the Red Wege 1919. Lithograph. Collection Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven, Holland. ©2005 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Figure 9.3b: Lissitzky, El (Eleazar) (1890- 1941.The Constructor, elf-portat. Gelatin silver print. Russian, 1924. 10.7 x 11.8 cm. Location: Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Great Britain. © 2007 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New YorkVG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Figure 9.4: Reproduced from Pioneers of Modern Typography by Herbert Spencer. © 1969 Herbert Spencer. Courtesy of Lund Humphries Publishers Limited; Figure 9.5a: Spencer Collection, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations; Figure 9.5b: Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso (1876-1944). In the Evening, Lying on Her Bed, She Reread the Letter from Her Artilleryman at the Front. 1919. Letterpress, 13 3/8 x 9 1/4". Jan Tschichold Collection, Gift of Philip Johnson. (598.19771.) Location: The Muse; Figure 9.5c: Merril C. Berman Collection. Photo Credit: Jim Frank; Figure 9.6: Goncharova, Natalia (1881-1962), Igra v adu (A Game in Hell), 1912. Illustrated book with thirteen lithographs, page: 7 3/16 x 5 1/2" (18.3 x 14 cm). Gift of The Judith Rothschild Foundation. (31.2001.1) (w/.2); Figure 9.7a: International Dada Archive, University of lowa Libraries; Figure 9.7b: Hannah Hoch, "Cut with the Cake Knife." 1919. Collage. 44 7/8" x 35 3/8". Staatliche Museen, Berlin. Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY. ©2008 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Figure 9.8: © 2008 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New YorkVG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Figure 9.9: Rodchenko, Alexander (1891-1956). Novyi Lef, . 8 New Left. 1928. Letterpress, 8 7/8" × 5 13/16" (22.5 × 14.8 cm). Jan Tschichold Collection, Gif of hilip Johnson. (573.1977.a-b). Digital Image © The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY; Figure 9.10: Merril C. Berman Collection. Photo Credit: Jim Frank; Figure 9.11: Boat spread from 'For Reading Out Loud', a collection of poems by Mayakovsky (1893-1930) pub. in Berlin. 1923 (see also 86285), Lissitzky, Eliezer (El) Markowich (1890- 1941)/Private Collection, © DACS/The Bridgeman Art Library International; Figures 9.12, 9.13: Picture Desk, Inc./ Kobal Collection; Figures 9.14, 9.15a, b: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 9.16: © SSPL/The Image Works; Figure 9.17: The New York Public Library/ Art Resource, NY; Figure 9.18: Gustav Klutsis. "Building Socialism Under the Banner of Lenin", 1930. Lithograph of photomontage. Purchased with funds from the ICP Aquisitions Committee with additional funds provided by Jack Benning and Elihu Rose, 1999. © 2007 ESTATE OF GUSTAV KLUTSIS; Figure 9.19: Two 1 million Mark banknotes, 1923, Bayer, Herbert (1900-85)/Private Collection, © DACS/The Stapleton Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library International; Figures 9.20a, b: Rodchenko & Stepanova Archive, Courtesy Howard Schickler Fine Art LLC; Figure 9.20c: © The Print Collector/Alamy; Figure 9.21: Merril C. Berman Collection. Photo Credit: Jim Frank; Figure 9.22a, top left and below: V &u bray;The LasiFure 9.22b: Figure 298 from Graphic Style: From Victorian to Post-Modern by Steven Heller & Seymour Chwast. Copyright © 1988 Steven Heller, Seymour Chwast, and Pushpin Editions. Reproduced by permission of Harry N Abrams, Inc.; Figure 9.23: Reproduced from Pioneers of Modern Typography by Herbert Spencer. 1969 Herbert Spencer. Courtesy of Lund Humphries Publishers Limited; Figure 9.24a: Kurt Schwitters, Design for Merz, 1924. © 2007 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Figure 9.24b: Kurt Schwitters, Design for Pelikan Ink advertisement. © 2007 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Figures 9.24c, d: International Dada Archive, University of lowa Libraries; Figure 9.25a: Merril C. Berman Collection. Photo Credit: Jim Frank; Figure 9.25b: Courtesy of Klingspor-Museum, Offenbach, Germany; Figure 9.26: Reproduced from Pioneers of Modern Typography by Herbert Spencer. 1969 Herbert Spencer. Courtesy of Lund Humphries Publishers Limited; Figure 9.27: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figures 9.28a, b: Reproduced from e  Mod Traphy  Herbert Spencer. © 1969 Herbert Spencer. Courtesy of Lund Humphries Publishers Limited.
