> 来源：Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily)\Graphic design history a critical guide (Drucker, Johanna, 1952-, McVarish, Emily).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 11

Figure 11.1: National Archives and Records Administration; Figure 11.2: Fortune Magazine; Fgures 11.3, 11. Courtesy fhe Library Congress; iure 11.Univesity ashi Libraries, Special Collections (UW 27275z); Figure 11.6b: The original Paterson Pageant Program, on which this drawing appeared, is part of the collection of the American Labor Museum/Botto House National Landmark. The poster is a copy of the program cover; Figure 11.7: Merril C. Berman Collection. Photo Credit: Jim Frank; Figure 11.8a: Klucis, (Klutsis) Gustav (1895-1940). Fulfilled Plan, Great Work. 1930. Lithograph, printed in color, 46 3/4 × 33". Purchase Fund, Jan Tschichold Collection. (357.1937). Location: The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. The Museum of Modern Art; Figure 11.8b: Art Resource/ Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz; Figure 11.9a: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 11.9b: © Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy; Figure 11.9c: Printed by permission for the Norman Rockwell Family Agency Copyright 1943 the Norman Rockwell Family Entities/CORBIS; Figure 11.9d: VAGA; Figure 11.10: Courtesy of the Library of Congress; Figure 11.11: Photo by Bert Hardy/Picture Post/Getty Images; Figure 11.12: Fortune Magazine; Figures 11.13, 11.14: Courtesy Northwestern University Library; Figure 11.14c: The Advertising Archives; Figure 11.15: National Archives and Records Administration; Figure 11.15.b: "Organization of An Armored Division" from figure VII1-2, page 102 of Pictographs and Graps: How to Mak and Use Them by Rudolf Modly and Dyno Lowenstein, 1937, Harper & Brothers. Courtesy of HarperCollins Publishers; Figure 11.16: Verlag Niggli, AG; Figure 11.17a: Fortune Magazine; Figure 11.17b: Courtesy the Will Burtin Collection, RIT Libraries, Rochester Institute of Technology and Used with Permission of Pfzier Inc.; Figures 11.18a, : Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague; Figure 11.19: Pearson Education/PH College; Figures 11.20a, b: Container Corporation of America; Figure 11.21: Imperial War Museum, London; Figures 11.22, 11.23: Fortune Magazine.
