> 来源：Transition Design Provocation (Irwin, Terry Kossoff, Gideon Tonkinwise etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Transition Design Provocation (Irwin, Terry Kossoff, Gideon Tonkinwise etc.)\Transition Design Provocation (Irwin, Terry Kossoff, Gideon Tonkinwise etc.).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Theories of Change

Never in history has the need for change been more urgent (Max-Neef and Smith 2011). Yet, transformational societal change will depend upon our ability to change our ideas about change itself – how it manifests and how it can be catalyzed and directed. Systems-level, ongoing societal change is inherently transdisciplinary – it must be informed by ideas, theories, and methodologies from many varied fields and disciplines. Theories of Change is a key area within the Transition Design Framework for three important reasons: (1) A theory of change is always present within a planned/designed course of action, whether it is explicitly acknowledged or not; (2) Transition to sustainable futures will require sweeping change at every level of our society; (3) Our conventional, outmoded and seemingly intuitive ideas about change lie at the root of many wicked problems (Escobar 2011; Irwin 2011; Scott 1999).

The Theories of Change section of the Framework is a fluid, evolving body of knowledge and ideas, often from outside design, whose objective is to provide designers with new tools and methodologies to initiate and catalyze transitions toward more sustainable futures. We have identified several approaches, such as Socio-Technical Regime Theory, Post-Normal Science, Social Practice Theory, Human Scale Development, Social Ecology, Social Psychology, and Critique of Everyday Life, amongst others, that are relevant to Transition Design.

Of particular relevance is a new, transdisciplinary body of knowledge, Living Systems/ Complexity theory that explains the dynamics of change within complex systems and challenges our current paradigms and assumptions. These ideas have the potential to inform new approaches to design and problem solving. Ideas and discoveries from a diversity of fields such as physics, biology, sociology, and organizational development have revealed that change within open, complex systems such as social organizations and ecosystems manifests in counter-intuitive ways. Although change within such systems can be catalyzed and even gently directed, it cannot be managed or controlled, nor can outcomes be accurately predicted (Briggs and Peat 1990; Capra and Luisi 2014; Meadows 2008; Priogogine and Stengers 1994; Wheatley 2006).

Are there other theories and approaches relevant to Transition Design? How can design/ designers contribute to these approaches to social, economic, political, and environmental change?
