> 来源：Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The colonial ‘scramble’ and Joseph Chamberlain’s development plans, 1885–1903

## CAUSES AND RESULTS OF THE EUROPEAN ‘SCRAMBLE’ FOR TROPICAL COLONIES

Although the tropical colonies had made some important economic advances prior to 1885, and were beginning to assume a much more important role within the British Empire, they still represented a relatively minor component of the whole in the early 1880s. The next thirty years or so, however, were to see a startling transformation, by which the size of the tropical empire was very substantially increased. Most of this expansion took place in Africa, and not surprisingly it has received the most attention and publicity, but it should not be forgotten that the celebrated colonial ‘scramble’ was not confined to Africa, and that important new British colonies were established—or in some cases greatly extended—in Asia and the Pacific Islands as well as in Africa, as may be seen in Table 4.1, which charts the expansion of British colonial rule by region.

Although very important extensions of British formal rule took place, particularly in eastern and southern Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Nyasaland/ Malawi, Northern Rhodesia/Zambia) and also in West Africa (Nigeria and Gold Coast/Ghana) and Malaya, this period of expansion was also, ironically, a period of reduced British influence in the tropics, for Britain was forced to relinquish the informal economic influence it had exercised in many regions to aggressive new colonial powers (especially France and Germany) who carved out extensive new colonies for themselves and thereby separated and confined the British colonies, particularly in West Africa. Thus Nigeria and the Gold Coast were separated by German control of Togo in 1884 and the French seizure of Dahomey/Benin in 1893.1 More seriously, the British protectorates of Sierra Leone (1896) and Gambia (1894) were severely circumscribed by the expansion of French West Africa, and were reduced to enclaves which were far too small for optimum economic development. With the benefit of hindsight, it can be seen that the British empire, and its successor West African States, have paid a heavy price for the vacillation, irresolution and confusion of British colonial policy towards West Africa at that time.2

In Eastern and Central Africa the situation was not so serious, since the British East African Protectorate (Uganda and Kenya) was large, as was the area comprised in Nyasaland/Malawi, and Northern Rhodesia/ Zambia and Southern Rhodesia/Zimbabwe, but British East and British Central Africa were separated by the large Ger man colony of Tanganyika, from its formation in 1884 until its conquest by Britain in 1917–18. Even after Tanganyika became a British mandated territory in 1919, and hence a bridge between East Africa and Central Africa, this did not lead to the unification of those areas as some people had hoped. This proposal was rejected in 1929 in the Report of Sir E.Hilton Young’s Commission on Closer Union of the Dependencies in Eastern and Central Africa.3 It is doubtful whether in fact the unification of such a huge area, stretching from Kenya in the north to Zambia in the south, would have been a practicable proposition from the administrative point of view, but this was not the critical issue. The reason the British government rejected the plan was political. The proponents of the idea wished to subordinate the huge majority African population living in the area to the small minority of European settlers in Zimbabwe (then Southern Rhodesia) and Kenya. The British government quite correctly saw that such a proposal would lead to acute resentment and probably resistance, and that African interests should have paramountcy in East Africa.4 Thus, although the abandonment of Closer Union avoided some serious problems, it still contributed to the ultimate ‘Balkanisation’ of Africa.

The motivation for the imperial partition and absorption of tropical Africa between 1885 and 1900 has attracted an immense literature, some of it highly polemical, and it is probable that agreement will never be finally reached concerning the precise mixture of commercial, financial, social, strategic and power-political forces that were involved, and their complex interrelationships.5 It is clear in some cases, perhaps Nigeria is one, that fairly straightforward economic factors, like the protection of the palm oil trade, were prominent, though not necessarily totally dominant; in other cases, perhaps Sierra Leone, Kenya and Uganda are examples, economic forces were much less powerful than the need to prevent another power from acquiring exclusive control over important regions. Though even in the case of Uganda and Kenya, where there was a strategic reason for the extension of British rule in the desire to protect the sea route to India, both via the Cape of Good Hope and Suez Canal, and in particular to safeguard British paramountcy in Egypt by ensuring that no other power controlled the sources of the Nile, the expected economic potential of the region was always active in the minds of those who sanctioned the action.6

e chronology of the colonial ‘scramble’ and it
<table><tr><td colspan="6">WEST AFRICA</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Nigeria</td><td colspan="2">Gold Coast/Ghana</td><td colspan="2">Sierra Leone</td></tr><tr><td>1885 1886</td><td>Oil Rivers Protectorate Royal Niger Co.</td><td>1896 1901</td><td>N. Territoreis Protectorate Gold Coast Colony &amp; N.</td><td></td><td>1896 Sierra Leone Protectorate</td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td>N. Nigeria Protectorate</td><td></td><td>Territories united</td><td>Gambia</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1914 1919</td><td>N. &amp; S. Nigeria united Brit. Cameroon (mandate)</td><td>1919</td><td>British Togo (mandate)</td><td></td><td>1894 Protectorate</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">EAST AFRICA</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td></td><td>Uganda</td><td></td><td>Zanzibar</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1886 British claim</td><td></td><td>1886</td><td>British claim</td><td>1890</td><td>British Protectorate (F.O.)</td></tr><tr><td>1888</td><td>British Imperial East Africa Co. chartered</td><td>1890</td><td>Assigned to British Imperial East Africa Co.</td><td>1914</td><td>Transferred to C.O.</td></tr><tr><td>1895</td><td>(Part of) British East Africa</td><td>1895</td><td>(Part of) British East Africa</td><td>Tanganyiku</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Protectorate under F.O.</td><td></td><td>Protectorate</td><td></td><td>1919 British (mandate)</td></tr><tr><td>1905 1920</td><td>Transferred to C.O.</td><td>1905</td><td>Transferred to C.O.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Kenya Colony established</td><td>1920</td><td>Uganda Colony established</td><td>Somaliland</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1884 1898</td><td>British Protectoratc (Ind. O)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>British Protectorate (to F.O.)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1905</td><td>British Protectorate (to C.O.)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">SOUTHERN AFRICA</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland/ Malaun</td><td></td><td>N. Rhodesia/Zambia</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1874</td><td>Missions established</td><td>1889</td><td>British South African Co. estab-</td><td></td><td>Bechuanaland/Botswana 1885 British Protectorate</td></tr><tr><td>1889</td><td></td><td></td><td>lished</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1893</td><td>British Protectorate Enlarged to bc British Central</td><td>1924</td><td>British Protectorate British Protectorate to C.O.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>African Protectorate (F.O.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1904</td><td>Enlarged to be British Central</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>African Protectorate (C.O.)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

884 1061 1061  
  
AS A AND AIAI ng d 1881 9881 8881 8881 9681 0681 8061 9061 6061 3161 POATS L481 8481 4881 8881 3681 £681 9061

From the development viewpoint the reasons which motivated the extension of British colonial rule are much less important than the policies and activities that were pursued after colonial rule had begun; except of course in those cases, of which Gambia is an extreme example, where the circumstances in which rule began were such as more or less to guarantee that economic development was going to be very limited. A country which consists simply of one river valley 250 miles long and only 12 miles wide, must of necessity find itself in an uncomfortably constrained situation from almost every point of view.7 However, if Gambia, and to lesser extent Sierra Leone, Nyasaland and Bechuanaland/Botswana were constituted in an unsatisfactory way by the scramble, this was much less the case for Britain’s other tropical colonies, some of which possessed relatively favourable population and resource endowments.

## THE NEW COLONIES: NIGERIA

Nigeria was perhaps the most fortunately placed of the new colonies in terms of development potential. To the relatively small Lagos colony were added two adjacent territories in Eastern and Northern Nigeria, over which British rule was rather hesitantly extended in the 1880s, before all three were formally joined in a united Nigeria in 1914. In 1885 a British protectorate was established over the very considerable area of Southeastern Nigeria which forms the delta lands of the river Niger. This was a great centre of the palm oil trade and the British protectorate was originally named the Oil Rivers Protectorate. In 1893 it became the Niger Coast Protectorate and in 1906 was merged with the Lagos colony to become Souther n Nigeria. It was, however, considerably smaller than the huge area in Central and Northern Nigeria which was assigned to a British chartered company which, after several confusing changes of name, eventually became the Royal Niger Company.8 This company was formed by Sir George Taubman Goldie and his associates and received a royal charter in 1886. It was supposed to provide colonial rule on the cheap. British control of a valuable area would be maintained at no expense to the British government, while the company would provide policing and administration (in association with local chiefs, with whom the company signed treaties) in exchange for a charter under which certain trading rights and privileges were granted on condition that free trade was maintained in the region. It was asking rather too much that the company should be expected to pay all the administrative and military expenses of extending British rule over an immense area, and should then allow all its competitors equal trading facilities with itself. Despite the pledges given in the charter it soon became clear that the company was effectively monopolising the trade of Northern Nigeria, and that the concept of trying to combine political and commercial activities was inappropriate, and benefited neither. In 1900 the charter was revoked and the British government bought all the company’s political and administrative rights, leaving it as a purely trading organisation.9 However, this did not immediately solve the British government’s problems. Many of the peoples of Northern Nigeria resisted British rule. They had believed when they signed treaties with the Royal Niger Company that these merely concerned trade and friendly relations. When they found that the British claimed ownership of their land and political control they naturally resisted this disruption of their economic, political and social life. It was only because of the overwhelming technical superiority of his weapons (machine-guns versus spears) that Sir Frederick Lugard, the Nigerian proconsul, was able to defeat them in a series of fiercely fought battles between 1902 and 1906. Later Lugard was able to win over the support of the emirs and chiefs by buttressing their position against their own local critics and rivals in his celebrated system of ruling by ‘Indirect Rule’ by which British ‘advisers’ subtly controlled the activities of the ‘traditional’ rulers.10 The British authorities thus gained the cooperation of the indigenous rulers but at the expense of ‘freezing’ what had formerly been a fluid customary society, with serious consequences for future development. For instance, in deference to the local rulers’ Muslim susceptibilities, Christian missionaries were barred from Northern Nigeria, education remained with Koranic schools and teaching in Arabic, with the result that Northern Nigerians were later severely handicapped by their ignorance of English, with its access to modern scientific and commercial ideas.11 However, all this is to anticipate future problems.

At the outset of colonial rule in 1906 the British had control over a country with an area of rather more than 350,000 square miles, which is three times the size of the United Kingdom, and about the same size as France and Germany put together. It is about 700 miles from east to west, and 650 miles from north to south, and lies between 4° and 14° north of the Equator. Apart from a belt of mangrove swamps along much of the coast, ver y little of the country is unfit for human habitation, and its estimated population of 13.6 million in 1900 was the largest of any African country (Egypt, the next most populous African country, had about 11.3 million people in 1900). With a population in the 1990s approaching 90 million, it is far larger than any other African country .12

Dense tropical rain forest occupied the southern part of the country for 100 miles or so inland from the coast, though in recent years it has been much reduced. It gives way to a rolling savannah plateau of between 1,000 and 2,000 feet above sea level, but which rises in a few places to heights of over 5,000 feet. The most prominent of these are the Jos-Bauchi plateau in the north-centre of the country and the mountains which form the eastern border with Cameroon. The savannah plateau gradually gives way to desert conditions along the northern border with the Republic of Niger, but all parts of the country receive some rain in the monsoon seasons, and the true Sahara desert begins some way to the north of the border.

The Niger river flows through the country for about 730 miles from the northwest to the south-centre, and about 225 miles upstream from its mouth it is joined by the Benue river, which flows southwestwards for some 400 miles from its source in Northern Cameroon. The two rivers are immense and provide Nigeria with navigable arteries which stretch for hundreds of miles. With some coal in the southeast near Enugu and with extensive tin deposits on the Bauchi plateau, Nigeria had some scope for mining and mineral development, but its chief assets were in the agricultural sector, where a wide range of tropical crops and forest products supported a vigorous and adaptable people, who had learned to overcome even the disadvantages of a hot humid climate and the presence of disease-carrying mosquitos and tsetse flies. Yet despite considerable earlier advances in agricultural specialisation and urban culture, the country was still relatively underpopulated at the outset of the colonial period and the scope for rapid increases in production and commercialisation was extensive.13

## THE NEW COLONIES: THE GOLD COAST (NOW GHANA)

The other West African colony with a promising development potential was the Gold Coast, lying about 140 miles to the west of Nigeria. The establishment of a formal colony in 1874 had extended British rule over a considerable area in the south of the country, but the precise relationship between the British authorities and the native states had been left vague, and even the boundaries of the colony had been left indeterminate.14 The powerful inland forest state of Asante had been defeated in 1874 by Sir Garnet Wolseley, but had not been incorporated in the colony. Relations remained strained and it was not until after another war in 1896, and mounting encroachments from the French and the Germans, that Britain finally staked out a claim to the Gold Coast hinterland by establishing protectorates over Asante and the Northern Territories in 1902. This latter area lay roughly between $8 ^ { \circ }$ and $1 1 ^ { \circ }$ north of the Equator in the savannah and comprised numerous peoples of whom the Gonja, the Dagomba, the Mamprusi, and the Talensi were perhaps the most numerous.

The result was that by 1902 the British had established a large, rectangular colony stretching along the coast for 334 miles, and inland for some 450 miles at its greatest extent. The area was approximately 78,650 square miles, comprising 23,490 square miles in the original Gold Coast colony, 24,560 square miles in Asante and 30,600 square miles in Northern Territories. In 1919 part of the former German colony of Togo, was added to the eastern Gold Coast under a League of Nations mandate, adding a further 13,040 square miles to the colony, making a grand total of 91,690 square miles—about the same size as the United Kingdom.15

The territory was very sparsely populated. The first attempt at a complete census was made in 1911, when just over 1.5 million people were counted, although this census was admitted to be inadequate. For instance, in the Northern Territories, according to the Gold Coast Handbook, 1923 many villages could not be counted

owing to the wildness of the inhabitants. One finds that in parts of the Tumu area, even in 1921, the only practical method of enumeration was extremely primitive. The Chief ’s messengers brought the District Census Officer calabashes filled with beans, groundnuts and stones representing the numbers of males, females, and children in the more remote villages.16

The average density of population in 1911 was just under 19 people per square mile compared with 359 in Great Britain.17

In the 1890s the means of communication were limited to small boats on the rivers and narrow bush paths through the jungle, though a wider network of trading waterways existed in the northern savannah lands. The agricultural and forest potential of the country was largely untapped, though there were small exports of palm products, rubber and lumber. Between 10,000 and 20,000 tons of palm oil and palm kernels were exported during the 1890s, but the once booming rubber exports had declined to a mere three tons in 1898.18 What had really interested the British in the country had been gold, and a mini-gold rush had taken place in the early 1880s, but although there are important gold mines in the country their value was greatly overestimated. No fewer than 476 companies with a nominal capital of nearly £43 million were registered for gold mining and exploration in West Africa (mainly in the Gold Coast) between 1880 and 1904, but at that date there were only four Gold Coast companies whose output of gold was worth more than £10,000 a year.19

Ironically it was not gold, but a tropical tree from the Americas which was virtually unknown on the Gold Coast before 1881—the cocoa tree— − on which the country’s considerable export growth in the first half of the twentieth century was to rest; but this development was only just beginning when British colonial rule was established in the Gold Coast, and was certainly not foreseen by the authorities.20

## THE NEW COLONIES: UGANDA AND KENYA

The other tropical colonies which seemed to have promising development potential were the East African colonies previously referred to. They comprised a large area lying athwart the Equator and stretching some 600 miles from north to south and over 800 miles from east to west, which initially lay within the British East Africa Protectorate, though they eventually became the separate colonies of Uganda and Kenya. Although linked together by geographical proximity and an extensive railway (some 650 miles long) which connected Uganda to the Indian Ocean at the Kenyan port of Mombasa, they were in fact very different both in their climate and resource endowments and in their earlier history. The highlands of Kenya were thought to be attractive for European settlers, but initially it was not Kenya which seemed to hold out the best hopes for economic development, but Uganda, which was occupied by a vigorous and relatively advanced population, especially in the state of Buganda on the shores of Lake Victoria.21

Buganda was unusual among tropical African states. It was a fertile and fairly densely populated country (estimates of the 1890s put its population at around one million, though these were essentially informed guesses and may have been exaggerated) with a relatively advanced agriculture, a hierarchical political system based on chiefs who held landed estates to finance their rule, and a monarch, called the Kabaka, with very extensive powers. As such it contrasted fairly strongly with the majority of the surrounding peoples, most of whom were only loosely organised politically and some of whom were cattle-keeping nomads, such as the Masai in Central Kenya and the Karamajong in Northeastern Uganda. These people practised a lifestyle which was very finely attuned to the arid and inhospitable environment in which they lived. Their migrations in sympathy with the changing patterns of rainfall and aridity were in fact the optimum response to their harsh environment; but almost inevitably this was misunderstood by the early colonial officials, who thought that the land was ‘empty’ and unutilised, and could therefore be given to European settlers without harming the nomads. The consequences of this mistake were later to prove very severe as the nomads were forced off the best land, and the remainder became seriously overstocked and degraded. The full nature of this calamity did not become fully understood until the 1930s.22

As stated earlier, British economic interests in East Africa were more latent than actual prior to 1903. British consuls, like Dr (later Sir) John Kirk (1847–1922) had resided in Zanzibar and had tried to influence its sultans to abolish the slave trade, which their subjects carried on all over East Africa to serve markets in Arabia and surrounding countries, and had built up some legitimate’ trade (mainly with India) but it was not very extensive. Additionally, British and French missionaries who had penetrated to Uganda before 1890 had had a remarkable success in converting leading chiefs to their respective versions of Christianity (Anglican and Roman Catholic). This unfortunately led to internal conflict, exacerbated by Muslim and pagan factions, so that the missionaries lives were soon in danger. Finally, Britain perceived a need to control the headwaters of the Nile, which flowed out of Lake Victoria Nyanza at Jinja in Uganda, lest a rival European power (Germany from Tanganyika or France from French Congo) should cut off Egypt’s water supply and endanger British control there. This fear was probably fanciful, but combined with the other causes, and the hope of future economic development, was sufficient to propel a rather reluctant British government to supersede the bankrupt British Imperial East Africa Company, which had tried, but failed, to play in Uganda the role which the Royal Niger Company had performed in Nigeria. So in 1894 a British protectorate was established in Uganda, and Parliament was induced to vote a small sum of money for a railway survey.23 Sir Charles Eliot, who governed the British East Africa Protectorate from 1900 to 1904, summarised subsequent events, as follows:

in 1895 the Company sold their remaining rights to the Government for £250,000, and the East Africa Protectorate was constituted. An Official notice of August 31, 1896, declares that ‘all the territories in East Africa under the Protectorate of Her Majesty, except the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba, and the Uganda Protectorate, are for the purposes of administration included in one Protectorate, under the name of the East Africa Protectorate’. It was decided to construct the Uganda Railway. The first rails were laid in 1895, and the first train reached the Lake in December 1901.24

The lakeside terminus was at Port Florence, now Kisumu, on the Gulf of Kavirondo, whence cargo and passengers proceeded by steamer either to Entebbe or to Port Bell, the port of Kampala, the capital of Buganda.

Although Uganda did not initially have much to export, except ivory, which was a declining trade, its population was numerous and industrious and eager for European goods. Sir Harry Johnston, who was sent to Uganda as a special commissioner, reported in 1900 that they were ‘greedy for cloth and for almost every manufactured article up to a phonograph and a brougham’.25 Optimists believed that agricultural exports would soon be found since the soil was fertile and well watered. Cotton grew wild and coffee and rubber also looked like good prospects. Johnston dreamed that by uniting Uganda and Kenya a new India could be created. Kenneth Ingham in The Making of Modern Uganda notes that he wrote enthusiastically

to the Foreign Secretary on February 18, 1900, to say that he had already found an excellent site for a joint capital on the Mau plateau near mile 475 on the Uganda Railway. Mombasa, he added gaily, would be the Bombay of the new, united Protectorate and should remain the capital of the coastal region. Entebbe, the Uganda capital, would be the Calcutta of East Africa, and Fort Portal with its snowy Ruwenzori mountains in the background would be its Darjeeling. The new capital, high on the rolling plateau, would then become the Simla of the United Protectorate.26

He could hardly have chosen anyone less likely than Lord Salisbury, who was prime minister as well as foreign secretary, to be enthusiastic about such flights of fancy, and not surprisingly he got a cool reply.

The protectorates remained separate and pursued different courses. Each was in truth quite large enough on its own. Uganda comprised some 94,000 square miles (though 14,000 of these were in Lake Victoria Nyanza) and was thus nearly as large as Great Britain. Much of the country was a rolling plateau between 4,000 and 5,000 feet above sea level, so that, although on the Equator, it was not excessively hot. To the north the savannah lands suffered from periodic drought, but a network of lakes and rivers such as the Nile, Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert, provided fairly good inland communications by water. Distance from the sea was the problem as far as trade was concerned, but once the Uganda railway had been opened in 1901 the prospects for the beginning of development via export crops looked quite promising—as indeed they proved to be with Uganda’s booming cotton exports in the decade before 1914, (see next chapter for details).

Kenya represented a different problem. Over twice as large as Uganda (containing a land area of 219,730 square miles) it comprised a series of sharply contrasting regions, ranging from a narrow strip of mangrove forest along the coast, through a baking and inhospitable desert to the great rolling highlands of Central Kenya with forested and snow-covered peaks like Mount Kenya, the Aberdare ranges and Mount Elgon on the Uganda border, rising to heights between 10,000 and 17,000 feet. There were no navigable rivers of any significance, and transport depended on painfully slow foot porterage. It took Lugard and his caravan over four months from 6 August to 18 December 1890 to proceed from Mombasa to Kampala.27 Much of the country was sparsely inhabited and the nomadic Masai occupied the great rift valley which separate the settled, agricultural people, the Kikuyu, who occupied the forested country to the south of Mount Kenya and the

Aberdares, and the Luo peoples, who were settled in the west of Kenya around the Kavirondo Gulf and the shores of Lake Victoria, growing maize, sorghum and other grains.28

As we have seen, the British were only interested in Kenya initially as the route to Uganda, but it soon became evident that the central highlands were cool and fertile enough to be suitable for European settlers, and almost from the beginning, hopes of development were concentrated on that area. Sir Charles Eliot in the preface to his book The East Africa Protectorate (1905) wrote that

my special object has been to point out the opportunity which it offers for European colonization and the interesting effect which such a colony may have on the future development of Africa.29

After describing the mineral, agricultural and commercial advantages in some detail he concluded by saying that

closely connected with European colonisation is the question of native rights. This difficulty is lessened in East Africa by the paucity of the native population, and I think that the obstacles which it has been supposed to present to European settlement exist in prejudiced imaginations rather than in reality. Natives must be protected from unjust aggression, and be secured sufficient land for their wants; but with this proviso, I think, we should recognise that European interests are paramount. Nomad tribes must not be allowed to straggle over huge areas which they cannot utilise, nor ought the semi-settled natives to continue the wasteful and destructive practice of burning and clearing in the woods, using it for a few years, and then moving on and doing the same elsewhere.30

The misunderstanding about the rotational nature of African bushfallow farming revealed here was then compounded by another, equally serious. Eliot continued:

there is no real opposition between European and native interests, or cause for hostility. There is land enough for both, and the East African tribes are not sufficiently numerous to feel the pressure of European immigration.31

It is true that Kenya was not densely populated in 1905, and a series of epidemics, both animal and human, had recently decimated its peoples; but it was certainly not true that there would be no competition for land between European settlers and African farmers. Moreover this matter was compounded by the question of a labour supply for the European settlers.

These were not working farmers, but aristocrats like Lord Delamere, who proposed to lease or sell vast estates to ‘gentlemen settlers’ who would require an African labour force to work them. Thus vast acreages were alienated for European settlement (5,028,142 acres by 1914 in 3,068 holdings, average 1,639 acres) so that the local Africans became landless and were forced to work for the settlers. The ill-feeling caused by this policy rankled for years and lay at the heart of the Kenyan Africans resistance to British rule from as early as the 1920s.32 While it is probable that the inhabitants of Kenya received some indirect benefits from the settlement of the so-called White Highlands it is also true that the ensuing conflicts diverted the development of the Kenyan economy along a path which had ultimately to be abandoned. The history of the early development experience of Kenya is thus rather less instructive than that of colonies where the problem of European settlement did not arise. The same of course applies to Southern Rhodesia/Zimbabwe, where the ensuing conflict was much more prolonged and serious.33

## THE NEW COLONIES: MALAYA AND SINGAPORE

A rather different experience was occurring in Malaya, which was also the scene of a major expansion of British control in this period, although in Malaya, the process was not effectively completed until 1909. The confidence with which Governor Weld had completed his report in 1881 (see Chapter 3, p. 59) was fully borne out in the succeeding years. Tinmining in the western states of Perak and Selangor continued to expand rapidly, and was accompanied by forest and agricultural development; but in Malaya the development process was more complex than in Africa. It was not European settlers, but Chinese and Tamils from Southern India, who provided one of the spurs to growth, coupled with the import of European capital for trading, mines and plantations.34 Most of the Chinese and Indians went into the tin mines and new plantations of sugar, pepper, gambier, tapioca and, increasingly after 1895, of rubber, which was to become the great export staple of the colonial Malayan economy. It was hoped that the Malayan peasant farmers operating on a semi-subsistence basis would specialise in rice, vegetable and fruit production to feed the rapidly growing new towns like Kuala Lumpur and Port Swettenham; but huge quantities of imported rice from Burma, Thailand and Indo-China kept the price of rice low, and encouraged the local Malays either to quit agriculture for more lucrative jobs or to retreat to the remoter districts and to continue with subsistence production.35 The economic development of Malaya thus became more and more unequal, with the non-Malayan immigrants benefiting greatly while the local Malayan population were threatened with increasing marginalisation in their own country. As early as

1901, the 299, 740 Chinese and 548,210 Indians already outnumbered the 312,490 Malays, even though the Malay population had probably doubled since the 1870s.36

The further extension of British control over the Malayan peninsula took place in stages, partly because this assisted economic development, and partly because Britain feared the ambitions of France and Germany, and felt that if they were able to establish footholds in the peninsula (which at various times seemed possible) they would be in a position to threaten the huge British trade with China which passed via Singapore to Hong Kong, Shanghai and other Chinese ports. Thus, when domestic conditions seemed appropriate Britain took the opportunity to extend its control through the Resident system to all the Malay states in the southern part of the peninsula.37

It began with Johore, the state immediately across the straits from Singapore, in 1885, when that state accepted official British protection, but because the Sultan of Johore was so friendly to Britain, and acted so closely with the Governor of the Straits Settlements, it was not necessary to place a formal British Resident in his capital until the international crisis of 1914. Northwest of Johore were the Negri Sembilan, which were closely involved in the economic expansion around Malacca, and one of which, Sungai Ujong, was already a British protected state; and to the northeast was Pahang, the largest, and one of the least developed of the Malayan states, which extended about 100 miles up the east coast and over a large area of the central jungle.38 The rulers of the Negri Sembilan and Pahang both accepted British Residents in 1888. This extended British control from Singapore to Pahang, but in a way which was too uncoordinated to be convenient; so in 1895, Perak, Selangor, Negri Sembilan and Pahang were joined together as the Federated Malay States. But as Cowan comments

the so-called Federation soon became in effect a union, with the Resident-General as the Chief executive officer. The relations of this officer with the Residents meant that most of their control over policy quickly passed into his hands, and the development of largescale European investment in tin and rubber after 1895 resulted in the proliferation of the specialist departments such as Public Works, Mines, Railways, Posts and Telegraphs, and so on, with their headquarters at the Federal capital of Kuala Lumpur.39

Britain, now had in effect two linked colonies in Malaya—the Straits Settlements of Pahang, Province Wellesley, Dindings (carved out of the Perak coast in 1824) Malacca and Singapore, with their capital at Singapore, and the Federated Malay States, with their capital at Kuala Lumpar, connecting Malacca to Pahang—while the gap between Malacca and Singapore was filled by the allied and protected state of Johore.

In 1909 a further advance north and eastwards took place when Thailand was persuaded to relinquish its somewhat shadowy control over the west coast states of Kedah and Perils, which lay opposite, and to the north of Pahang; and over the northeast coastal states of Kelantan and Trengganu. These latter were still relatively undeveloped (but occupied a strategic position) while Perlis and Kedah not only occupied a critical location in relation to Pahang and Province Wellesley, but were vital suppliers of rice and other foods to both.40

The extension of political control in 1909 coincided with the completion of the west coast railway from Singapore to Butterworth, opposite Pahang, and left Britain with control over an area in the Malay peninsula comprising some 52,000 square miles, and stretching for about 470 miles from Singapore to Northern Perlis, and for about 200 miles from coast to coast at its maximum width between Perak and Trengganu, some 250 miles north of Singapore. Most of the coastlands of Southern Malaya are low-lying, flat, and very fertile, providing scope for a wide range of tropical crops, being both hot and well watered by monsoonal rains. Part of the interior is mountainous, with some peaks in the Cameron Highlands in the westcentre of the country rising to heights somewhat over 6,000 feet. Malaya thus provided excellent scope for forest and agricultural development, in addition to its considerable wealth in tin.41

As well as the major tropical colonies, which were obtained or expanded in the ‘scramble’ there were a number of minor colonies. These included places with small populations, like Nyasaland/Malawi and Sierra Leone in Africa, or Fiji, the Solomons and Tonga in the Pacific; and the older, depressed colonies like the West Indies, some of which had larger populations, but whose economies had become stagnant.

## THE NEW COLONIES: NYASALAND (NOW MALAWI)

Of the minor African colonies, Nyasaland/Malawi had become a British protectorate between 1889 and 1893, largely to suppress slave trading and protect the Scottish missionaries who had established stations at and around Blantyre in the hills which lay to the south of Lake Nyasa and to the east of the Shire river, which flows out of Lake Nyasa, southwards to the Zambesi in Mozambique, about 90 miles upstream from its mouth. Stretching along the west side of Lake Nyasa and down the Shire river almost to its junction with the Zambesi, the Nyasaland Protectorate was about 520 miles long from north to south and varied in width from 50 to 100 miles. It comprises 37,374 square miles of land and lay between 9° and 17° south of the Equator. Much of the land was over 3,000 feet high, and parts of the protectorate were relatively densely populated by the standards of nineteenth-century Africa. The development potential was, however, fairly limited since there was little to trade, and communications were poor because the Shire river was broken by rapids, making water communication between the lake and the sea very difficult. Slaves and ivory had been the early exports, but with their demise, the country could offer only maize and sorghum, for which there was no demand, and mountain timber, such as the Malanje cypress, which was too expensive to transport. Cecil Rhodes’ British South Africa Company was given a charter to search for minerals and develop mining in 1884, but by 1903 had little to show for its efforts.42

## MINOR COLONIES, OLD AND NEW

Far away on the west coast, the Sierra Leone Protectorate, established in 1896, offered rather better prospects. Although only covering 27,925 square miles, making it a little smaller than Scotland, but a little larger than Eire or Sri Lanka, it possessed some fertile rain forest on its eastern side, with a good potential for the export of palm oil, palm kernels, kola nuts and eventually cocoa. In Freetown it had potentially the best port in West Africa, and palm kernels and kola nuts were shipped down many rivers and then coastally to Freetown in the 1890s. In 1900 exports were worth £172,000 and £79,000 respectively. A railway was commenced in 1895 to proceed eastwards from Freetown into the palm belt, and it was confidently expected that exports would increase as it neared its destination, as indeed they did. The railway reached its eastern terminus in 1908, at a town called Pendembu, 277 miles from Freetown, near the border with Liberia; and by 1913, the tonnage of palm kernels exported had increased two and a half times, and their value had risen five-fold. This rise in trade provided the government with an enhanced revenue with which to commence further improvements to the infrastructure, health measures and education. It was all still very limited in 1900, but the future was beginning to look more promising than it had for many years past.43

By contrast, the economic situation in the West Indies had deteriorated. Still largely dependent on sugar exports, they had suffered acutely from competition from Mauritius and from European beet sugar, which enjoyed protective tariffs and bounties. The need to revitalise their economies was one of the problems with which Joseph Chamberlain wrestled when he took over the Colonial Office in 1895, as we shall see.44

The scatter of Pacific islands which Britain had acquired during the scramble were generally too small and remote to possess any great development potential, with the exception of Fiji, where the importation of Indian indentured labourers to grow sugar (both on plantations and on their own account) was beginning to show signs of success. The sugar was mostly exported to New Zealand and Australia, under the auspices of an Australian enterprise, The Colonial Sugar Refining Company, which was founded in 1880.45 The population of Fiji had reached 120,000 by 1901 and exports (mostly sugar) were valued at $\mathcal { f } 5 4 9 , 0 0 0$ . The development of the internal market, however, seems to have lagged behind, if the value of imports may be taken as a guide. They were worth only $\mathcal { L } 3 5 1 , 0 0 0$ in 1901— far less than the value of the exports.46

The protectorates over the more remote Pacific islands were primarily undertaken to appease fears in Australia and New Zealand that they would be colonised by France or Germany, and thus threaten Australasian security. The Cook Islands, a group of small atolls lying between Tonga and Tahiti, about $2 0 ^ { \circ }$ south of the Equator, were thus taken over in 1888; as were the rather more important Solomon Islands in 1893. The Solomons, of which Guadalcanal is the most important, lie to the east of Papua-New Guinea, between $5 ^ { \circ }$ and $1 0 ^ { \circ }$ south of the Equator. Rather more important than either of these was British North Borneo, which was awarded to the British North Borneo Company under a charter of 1882. It was believed to have some value as a source of tropical produce, but it was also occupied to counter Spanish claims from their colony in the Philippines, to suzerainty over the local sultanates of Sulu and Brunei.47 The small, but ancient sultanate of Brunei was regarded as being in a loose British ‘sphere of influence’ (it accepted British protection in 1888) since it bordered the British colony of Labuan and the state of Sarawak, which had been ruled by the Brooke family as ‘independent’, but as British rajahs, since 1841.48 The British North Borneo Company was another attempt at annexation on the cheap, Lord Granville, the foreign secretary, assuring the House of Lords on 13th March 1882 that British commercial interests would thereby be promoted ‘with an absence of reasonable ground for apprehending military or financial burdens’.49 British protection was extended to North Borneo in 1883, and the company continued to administer the territory until the Japanese occupation in 1941. In 1946 it became a Crown colony.

## JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN’S COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT POLICIES, 1895–1903

Thus, when Joseph Chamberlain moved into the Colonial Office in June 1895, he was confronted with a mixed bag of tropical colonies and dependencies, some of which were in a flourishing condition, and others of which showed every sign of neglect or decay. He immediately set out to survey his responsibilities and to lay plans for a major step forward in colonial development policy. It may be a source of some surprise that a politician of Chamberlain’s eminence and importance (as the most prominent and energetic of the Liberal Unionists) should have been interested in the mundane subject of colonial development, which had not hitherto excited any interest amongst major Victorian statesmen; especially when Lord Salisbury had offered him any office he wanted, including the Treasury, on the formation of the Unionist government in June 1895.50 The answer is not altogether clear, but was no doubt influenced to some extent by pressure from Chamberlain’s Birmingham constituency, where his supporters in the metal trades were finding competition from German and American rivals very difficult, both at home and in colonial markets, and who were already pressing for tariff protection within the empire, and seeking new markets.51 But probably more important was Chamberlain’s fear that Britain’s power, wealth and prestige were on the wane, and that unless it could be restored through imperial union and development, the future would lie with larger and more powerful rivals like Germany, the USA and Russia.52 This view is well summarised in the extract from Chamberlain’s letter of 13 June 1902 to Sir George Reid premier of New South Wales 1894–9 and of Australia 1904–5, cited by Kesner, which has a tr uly prophetic ring to it. Chamberlain wrote that

I feel sure that the time for small kingdoms has passed away. The future is with the great Empires and it rests with us to say whether our own shall be counted for many years to come as one of the greatest or whether we shall split up into minor comparatively unimportant nationalities.53

Clearly the expense of maintaining and defending an empire which was as large and as far-flung as the British, was going to be great, and threatened to become even greater.54 Therefore, what was needed were prosperous and contented subjects within all parts of the empire, Crown colonies as well as dominions, which were capable of raising sufficient revenues, both to contribute to the defence of their territories, and to generate sufficient investment capital to set their domestic economies on a path of self-continuing growth. Thus Chamberlain’s policies, while designed primarily to serve Britain’s interests, had the potential merit of also being beneficial to the colonies, if they could be achieved. Canada, Australia, and to some extent New Zealand, South Africa, and India, showed signs of autonomous economic development (though most of them obstinately refused to contribute to imperial defence). The tropical colonies were, however, a more difficult problem, as Chamberlain was well aware.

While still in opposition, in March 1895, Chamberlain had told the Birmingham Jewellers Association that

it is not enough to occupy certain great spaces of the world’s surface unless you can make the best of them—unless you are willing to develop them. We are landlords of a great estate; it is the duty of a landlord to develop his estate.55

After taking office in June 1895 he set to work to survey his domains and was soon able to amplify his plans. On 22 August he told the House of Commons that the

underdeveloped estates could never be developed without Imperial assistance…cases have already come to my knowledge of colonies which have been British Colonies perhaps for more than a hundred years in which up to the present time British rule has done absolutely nothing…I shall be prepared to consider very carefully myself, and then, if I am satisfied, confidently submit to the House, any case which may occur in which by the judicious investment of British money those estates which belong to the British Crown may be developed for the benefit of their population and for the benefit of the greater population which is outside.56

However, his optimism was soon to be cooled by a douche of cold water from the Treasury, which resolutely refused to invest public money in colonial development on to guarantee loans raised on the commercial money market; and without a Treasury guarantee, such loans could only be raised at rates of interest which were far higher than most colonies could reasonably be expected to pay—especially for long-term loans.57

Chamberlain was determined to overcome these obstacles and after repeated rebuffs from the Treasury to his requests for funds for railway building in various parts of the colonial empire, he hit upon what appeared to be an ingenious scheme. The shares in the Suez Canal, which Disraeli had purchased for Britain in 1875, passed into full government ownership in 1st July 1895. Their net cost had been a little over £2 million, but by 1895 they had appreciated to £24 million—a gain of some eleven-fold— and were yielding an annual income of £670,000. This was money which was derived to a considerable extent from dues on imperial trade, so what more appropriate, thought Chamberlain, than that it should be used to set up a guarantee fund for loans for ‘railways, bridges, harbours and irrigation’ in the colonies. He circulated a memorandum to the Cabinet on 8 January 1896:

It is certain that in many cases progress has been delayed, and in some cases absolutely stayed, because the only methods by which improvement could be carried out were beyond the scope of private resources…In Dominica, in British Honduras, and in British Guiana for instance, there are untold possibilities of natural wealth in the shape of gold and other minerals, dye woods and timber, and all tropical productions, which neither the colonies themselves nor individual adventurers are in a position to open up. Crown estates of immense extent and undoubted intrinsic value are waiting a purchaser because there are no proper means of access. Individual enterprise will till the fields and cut the timber, and work the mines; but Government and Government alone can make the roads and the railways. This is the true province of Government in new countries, and until it is recognised by Great Britain she will not have fulfilled her obligations to the dependencies which the she holds under her rule.58

Chamberlain had high hopes that his scheme would be successful, especially as it was supported by the prime minister, Lord Salisbury, and the leader of the House of Commons, Arthur Balfour; but the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Michael Hicks Beach was adamant in his refusal to accept it. He argued that the Suez shares had been purchased with public money, under parliamentary authority, and that any diversion of income derived from them to the colonies would be illegal. Furthermore, he would have to raise new taxes to replace the lost revenue. Hicks Beach won his argument in cabinet, ably supported by memoranda from officials like Edward Hamilton, the assistant secretary of the Treasury (who had formerly been Gladstone’s private secretary). Salisbury later lamented ruefully that ‘the influence which the Gladstonian garrison of the Treasury have upon Beach’s mind is very disastrous’.59

Chamberlain was not, however, a man to give up a struggle in which he believed, and he entered into negotiations with the Treasury designed to find another route to his end. After long and tortuous negotiations, a Colonial Loans Act was passed in 1899, which enabled Crown colonies to raise guaranteed loans from the Treasury for fairly long periods at relatively low rates of interest (S1/4 per cent for 30 years, 3 1/2 per cent for 40 years, and 3 3/4 per cent for 50 years). There was however a rub. The colonies had to pass laws making the repayment (and the interest) a first charge on the local revenues. This was not only very restrictive, but tended to discourage any future lenders. The Colonial Office decided therefore more or less to ignore the Act, and only to use it in emergencies. It appeared that the Treasury’s determination to control Chamberlain’s development expenditures had undermined him yet again.60 But once more he fought back, and finally in 1900, with the passage of the Colonial Stocks Act, he secured a measure which went some way towards giving him what he wanted.

Under the Colonial Stocks Act 1900, the colonies were given the privileges of being empowered to issue loan stock with trustee status (i.e. trustees could invest their funds in it), which was tantamount to an imperial guarantee. However this still did not solve the problem because even with the low interest rates then prevailing most colonies could not afford to borrow money. What they needed were development grants—a concept which was anathema to the ‘orthodox’ financial mandarins whose views still dominated governmental thinking. Chamberlain was able to make a very small breach in this wall by reviving grants-in-aid, such as the £30,000 which was given in 1897–98 to build roads in Dominica and settle peasant proprietors in St Vincent, and several others; but in relation to the development needs of the colonies these were trivial.61

The tendency of modern historians has been to play down Chamberlain’s success in what has come to be known as ‘constructive imperialism’, and to stress the limitations of his achievements. Andrew Porter notes that ‘Chamberlain’s own haste, lack of detailed preparations, and economic ignorance had much to do with his limited success, both on the ground and in attempts to convert the Treasury to his faith’.62 Nevertheless, while it is true that Chamberlain was sometimes a better publicist than performer, it is also true that he went quite a long way towards loosening the restrictive coils which had hitherto bound colonial development; and that after his tenure at the Colonial Office, the development issue was fixed permanently on the British government’s agenda.

His specific achievements may have been limited, but as Kesner maintains, measures like the Imperial Penny Postage Act, steamer and cable subsidies, and many railway, irrigation, drainage, sanitation and health programmes, initiated during Chamberlain’s years at the Colonial Office, did make a real difference.

These policies and pieces of legislation allowed these colonies some of the essential elements upon which the local population and foreign industrial and commercial elites could build new enterprises. For certain colonies, such as Lagos, British Guiana, Cyprus and Gold Coast, these circumstances led to a major economic transformation.63

It has also to be remembered that Chamberlain’s accession to the Colonial Office in 1895 coincided with the ending of the long downswing of prices and trade of the 1880s and early 1890s, so that his policies for the tropical colonies were assisted by the general upswing of business activity which characterised the later 1890s and the early twentieth century.64

5
