> 来源：Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# First fruits Colonial development, 1903–14

## A NEW ERA IN COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT

With the ending of the prolonged agony of the Boer War by the Peace of Vereeniging (31 May 1902) the Colonial Office could once again turn its attention to the development programme initiated by Chamberlain; and indeed the years between 1903 and 1914 saw some of the most effective advances yet recorded in the tropical colonies.1 Of course, compared with modern assessments of what was required these achievements were still very limited. The Colonial Office’s development philosophy still depended upon the belief that once the state had provided a framework of ordered government and a basic infrastructure, private entrepreneurs and private capital could be relied upon to initiate and carry out a steady programme of economic advance. That the development problem was not as simple as this was partly obscured by the initial achievements of private capital, both imported and domestic, as a response to the very simple infrastructural attainments of this period. Just because so many of the tropical colonies were so deficient in the elementary infrastructural needs such as railways, roads, bridges, harbours, currencies, banks and telecommunications, the response to their initial provision seemed almost miraculous—particularly in the field of foreign trade, as we shall see. This encouraged the illusion that the problems of economic development were relatively simple, and concealed the fact that further investments in infrastructural growth were unlikely to yield dramatic returns.

The advances of the Edwardian period were also facilitated by some fortuitous factors. After the prolonged pause in world-wide economic advance between 1873 and 1896, known at the time as the ‘Great Depression’ (though it seemed very mild to later generations) the world economy in general and the British economy in particular, entered into a period of boom and growth. Production and trade surged forward, and the prices of colonial agricultural and mineral produce rose in sympathy with this renewed demand. Thus, the provision of the new colonial infrastructures geared in very well with changes in the world economy, and enabled the colonial response to take place in favourable conditions. Furthermore, the Edwardian world was generally peaceful, trade was not much obstructed by tariff or financial restrictions; and trade was not much obstructed by tariff or financial restrictions; and until the international situation began to darken significantly around 1911, the period was one of hope and optimism.2 But, even allowing for these favourable exterior conditions, the economic achievements of many, though not all, the tropical colonies were still impressive.

## THE EXPANSION OF COLONIAL TRADE, 1884–1912

The economic achievements of the tropical colonies can be most clearly seen if we compare their trade performance in the early 1880s with that of the period just before the First World War (i.e. 1910–12). For in this period the growth in overseas trade continued on a very large scale. As in the period from the early 1850s to the early 1880s there were considerable variations in the performance of the tropical colonies, and there were even a few sugar colonies, like Barbados, British Guiana, St Lucia and Mauritius, whose trade contracted; but this was insignificant compared with the surging growth in Malaya, Ceylon, Nigeria, the Gold Coast and the new East African colonies. The growth in exports and imports between 1882–4 and 1910–12 is shown in Table 5.1 for seven of the leading tropical colonies. The West African colonies of the Gold Coast and Nigeria had the fastest growing exports with annual growth rates of 29.4 per cent and 26.4 per cent respectively in the twenty-eight year period; but they started from very low bases, and the total exports of the West African leader, Nigeria, at £5.2 million in 1910–12 were far overshadowed in value by the £40.5 million from the Federated Malay States and the £12.2 million from Ceylon. The best performance in the West Indies came from Trinidad and Tobago with exports worth just over £4 million (nearly double those of Jamaica) while the new colony of Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) in Southcentral Africa was not far behind with exports worth £3.1 million.

The import figures are similar to the export ones. Again Malaya was far in the lead with the Straits Settlement increasing their imports by a relatively massive (for the period 1910–12) figure of £28.9 million over 1882–4, with a respectable growth rate of 6.5 per cent a year, but again this was overshadowed by the West African late starters, Nigeria and the Gold Coast. The Gold Coast increased its imports over seven-fold and Nigeria recorded more than a ten-fold growth. Its annual average increase was an extraordinary 37.9 per cent. Ceylon, the Federated Malay States, Trinidad and Tobago and Southern Rhodesia all substantially increased their imports by amounts ranging from $\mathrm { \it f } 1 0 . 7$ to $\mathcal { L } 2 . 8$ million year in 1910–12 (annual averages).

Table 5.1 The growth of exports and imports by value (less bullion) 1882–4 to 1910–12, selected colonies (annual averages)
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>188284 £</td><td>191012 £</td><td>Increase £</td><td>%</td><td>Average annual growth ratc (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Straints Settlements</td><td>14,233,256</td><td>40,491,333</td><td>26,258,077</td><td>184.5</td><td>6.6</td></tr><tr><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>i 3,292,625</td><td>14,548,333 12,168,000</td><td>8,875,375</td><td>269.6</td><td>9.6</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon Nigeria</td><td>616,000h</td><td>5,171,000</td><td>4,555,000</td><td>739.4</td><td>26.4</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td>2,681,999</td><td>4,014,000</td><td>1,342,001</td><td>50.0</td><td>1.8</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>390,333</td><td>3,363,667</td><td>2,973,334</td><td>761.7</td><td>29.4</td></tr><tr><td>S. Rhodesia</td><td>a</td><td>3,105,433</td><td></td><td></td><td>•</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Straits Settlements</td><td>15,964,895</td><td>44,900,666</td><td>28,935,771</td><td>181.2</td><td>6.5</td></tr><tr><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>a</td><td>7,794,666</td><td></td><td>+</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>4,011,239</td><td>10,703,667</td><td>6,692,428</td><td>166.8</td><td>6.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>468,333b</td><td>5,436,333</td><td>4,968,000</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>1,780,666</td><td></td><td></td><td>1,060.8</td><td>37.9</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td></td><td>4,514,666</td><td>2,734,000</td><td>153.5</td><td>5.5</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>365,334</td><td>2,996,000</td><td>2,630,666</td><td>720.1</td><td>25.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>a</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>S. Rhodesia</td><td></td><td>2,849,866</td><td></td><td>—</td><td>−</td></tr></table>

a Separate figures not available; quantities small  
b Lagos only  
See Appendices 1 and 2 for details

As in the earlier period these were real, not inflationary, gains and took place in a period of remarkable price stability—the indices for food, raw materials and industrial prices remaining almost stationary throughout this period.3 Once again it was the Asian colonies; led by Malaya and Ceylon, which captured by far the largest share of the growing trade as can be seen in Tables 5.2 and 5.3 where the ten leading exporters and importers in 1882–4 and 1910–12 are listed in rank order of the value of their exports and imports. The recently developed African colonies had moved well up the tables by 1910–12 as we have already seen at the expense of some of the other colonies, especially in the West Indies. As exporters Jamaica and British Guiana had fallen to ninth and tenth places respectively, whilst Barbados had dropped out of the first ten. In relation to imports the story was very similar with much the same rank order. Mauritius, as already noted, had also suffered a trade decline, in absolute as well as relative terms, and had fallen from third to ninth place in the import table, with a decline in imports from £2.9 million in 1882–4 to £2.4 million in 1910–12.

However, not all the West Indian colonies suffered a decline. Trinidad’s economy had begun to grow rapidly, and taken together the West Indies, British Guiana (now Guyana) and British Honduras (now Belize) increased their value of their exports by 12 per cent in this period but managed to increase the value of their imports by 62 per cent. This discrepancy arose because they had imported considerably less than they had exported in the early 1880s, but reversed the process in the 1910–12 period, when they imported goods worth nearly £1.6 million more than they exported. Inward capital flows, perhaps to the expanding Trinidad oil and asphalt fields, just being developed, may have allowed them to pay for the import surplus.

Table 5.2 Value of exports (excluding bullion) by colony (first ten in rank order)
<table><tr><td colspan="4">18824 (£)</td></tr><tr><td>1.</td><td>Straits Settlements</td><td>14,233,256</td><td>1.</td><td>Straits Settlements</td><td>40,491,333</td></tr><tr><td>2.</td><td>Mauritius</td><td>3,942,333</td><td></td><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>14,548,333</td></tr><tr><td>3.</td><td>Ceylon</td><td>3,292.625</td><td></td><td>Ceylon</td><td>12,168,000</td></tr><tr><td>4.</td><td>British Guiana</td><td>2,901,000</td><td></td><td>Nigeria</td><td>5,171,000</td></tr><tr><td>5.</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>2,636,333</td><td>as</td><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td>4,024,000</td></tr><tr><td>6.</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>1,500,333</td><td>b,</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>3,105,433</td></tr><tr><td>7.</td><td>Barbados</td><td>1,217,666</td><td>7.</td><td>Southern Rhodesia</td><td>3,105,433</td></tr><tr><td>8.</td><td>Nigeria (Lagos)</td><td>616,000</td><td>8.</td><td>Mauritius</td><td>2,576,333</td></tr><tr><td>9.</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>390,333</td><td>9.</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>2,575,000</td></tr><tr><td>10.</td><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>387,667</td><td>10.</td><td>British Guiana</td><td>1,653,668</td></tr></table>

Table 5.3 Value of imports (excluding bullion) by colony (first ten in rank order)
<table><tr><td colspan="3">18824</td><td colspan="3">1910-12</td></tr><tr><td>1.</td><td>Straits Scttlements</td><td>15,964,895</td><td>1.</td><td>Straits Settlements</td><td>44,900,666</td></tr><tr><td>2.</td><td>Ceylon</td><td>4,011,239</td><td></td><td>Ceylon</td><td>10,703,667</td></tr><tr><td>3.</td><td>Mauritius</td><td>2,875,666</td><td>;a</td><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>7,794,666</td></tr><tr><td>4.</td><td>British Guiana</td><td>2,029,667</td><td>4.</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>5,436,333</td></tr><tr><td>5.</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>1,738,333</td><td>5.</td><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td>4,514,666</td></tr><tr><td>6.</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>1,504,000</td><td>6.</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>2,996,000</td></tr><tr><td>7.</td><td>Barbados</td><td>1,158,000</td><td>7.</td><td>Southern Rhodesia</td><td>2,849,866</td></tr><tr><td>8.</td><td>Nigeria (Lagos)</td><td>468,333</td><td>8.</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>2,843,666</td></tr><tr><td>9.</td><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>417,666</td><td>9.</td><td>Mauritius</td><td>2,407,333</td></tr><tr><td>10.</td><td>Fiji</td><td>416,666</td><td>10.</td><td>British Guiana</td><td>1,675,666</td></tr></table>

The export expansion of the tropical colonies continued to depend on a limited range of staples, although it was not quite as narrowly based as it had been in the 1880s. In particular sugar was far less dominant, as can be seen from Table 5.4. Tin from Malaya was still of prime, and increasing, importance, but it had been joined by the booming rubber industry (already accounting for well over a third of the exports from the Federated Malay States in 1910–12) and still growing fast. Tea had dramatically replaced coffee in Ceylon, where rubber was also important; and the new West African staples of cocoa and groundnuts had joined the traditional exports of palm oil and palm kernels.

Table 5.4 Shares of the three main exports in the seven leading exporting tropical colonies in 1910–12 compared with 1882–4
<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">% of Exports</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>3 Main exports</td><td>18824</td><td>1910-12</td></tr><tr><td>Straits Settlements</td><td>Fin</td><td>11.5</td><td>26.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rice</td><td>9.3</td><td>11.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>a</td><td>7.2</td></tr><tr><td>Federated Malay States</td><td>Tin</td><td>a</td><td>56.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>a</td><td>37.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Copra</td><td>a</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>Tea</td><td>a</td><td>45.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>a</td><td>21.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>a</td><td>7.5</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>46.9b</td><td>50.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm Oil</td><td>34.2b</td><td>32.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>a</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>13.5</td><td>33.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sugar</td><td>30.9c</td><td>15.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Balata gum</td><td>a</td><td>8.7</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>a</td><td>40.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gold</td><td>15.4</td><td>32.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>16.1</td><td>5.6</td></tr><tr><td>Southern Rhodesia</td><td>Gold</td><td>a</td><td>81.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Chrome</td><td>d</td><td>3.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Tobacco</td><td>i</td><td>1.5</td></tr></table>

a Not available  
b Lagos only  
c Trinidad only

The structure of imports still remained much the same as it had been in the earlier period, with basic foodstuffs like rice and simple manufactures like cotton cloths and various types of metal hardware predominat-ing in most colonies (see Table 5.5). The import structure of the Straits Settlements was distorted by the fact that they were not yet politically integrated with the Federated Malay States so that articles like tin were imported from interior regions, like that around Kuala Lumpur, to be reexported from the ports of Pahang and Malacca. Likewise Singapore’s huge entrepot trade meant that many of its imports and exports were goods in transit. The opium, which was produced in India and which passed through Singapore en route for China, was probably a case in point; although increasing quantities of opium were being imported into Malaya as demand grew strongly amongst the many Chinese who were working in the tin mines.

Table 5.5 Shares of the main imports in the seven leading importing tropical colonies in 1910–12 compared with 1882–4
<table><tr><td></td><td></td><td colspan="2">% of Imports</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Main imports</td><td>188284</td><td>1910-12</td></tr><tr><td>Straits Settlement</td><td>&#x27;Tin</td><td>13.5</td><td>22.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rice</td><td>11.2</td><td>13.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cotton Manufactures</td><td>6.7</td><td>6.6</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>Rice</td><td>43</td><td>30.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Coal and coke</td><td>9</td><td>8.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cotton Manufactures</td><td>11.7</td><td>7.2</td></tr><tr><td>Federatcd Malay States</td><td>Rice</td><td>λ</td><td>22.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Opium</td><td>a</td><td>8.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Hardware</td><td>a</td><td>6.9</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>Cotton goods</td><td>43.5b</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Spirits</td><td>15.4b</td><td>7.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Iron, stecl,</td><td>a</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad &amp; Tobago</td><td>Manufactures</td><td></td><td>6.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Apparel, etc.</td><td>18.7c a</td><td>10.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Balata gum Flour</td><td>7.7°</td><td>7.7 5.3</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Provisions</td><td>i</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Apparel, etc. Rum</td><td>38.5 17.9</td><td>3.4 2.3</td></tr><tr><td>Southern Rhodesia</td><td>Iron Manufactures</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Machinery &amp; Railway</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>materials</td><td>a</td><td>15.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cottons &amp; apparel</td><td>a</td><td>10.7</td></tr></table>

a Nil or negligible  
b Lagos only  
c Trinidad only

Generally speaking the trade pattern remained the classical one of exports of raw materials and foods and imports of a wide range of manufactured goods and fuels. Without any industries of their own the tropical colonies remained a buoyant market for the industrial exports of Britain and Europe. Unfortunately this structural imbalance was to be continued into the 1920s and 1930s, when it became increasingly inappropriate as the markets for colonial food and raw material exports became glutted.

In terms of their dependency on the ‘mother country’ for their exports the tropical colonies widened their trading network slightly, reducing their dependence on Britain as an export market from 35 per cent to 31 per cent, as the German and American markets expanded more rapidly than the

British. Changes in the sources of their imports are more difficult to determine owing to uncertainties in the statistics for the Straits Settlements for the 1880s, but by 1910–12 the tropical colonies were taking about one quarter of their imports from the UK, which probably represented a slight reduction in their dependence. (See Table 5.6.)

Table 5.6 Changes in the United Kingdom’s share of the trade of the tropical colonies, 1882–4 to 1910–12
<table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">United Kingdom share</td></tr><tr><td>Years</td><td>Exports</td><td>Imports</td></tr><tr><td>18824</td><td>35%</td><td>20%a</td></tr><tr><td>191012</td><td>31%</td><td>24%</td></tr><tr><td>Change</td><td>-4%</td><td>+4%</td></tr></table>

a Does not include Straits Settlements so is probably an understatement.

In comparison with India the tropical colonies had become pacesetters in the growth of trade with Britain even though starting from a much smaller base and with a considerably smaller total trade. As can be seen from Table 5.7 they increased their exports to Britain from £11.5 million in 1882–4 to £32.1 million in 1910–12, an increase of £20.6 million or 178.3 per cent (an average annual growth of 6.45 per cent) compared with an increase of only £4.45 million from India, or 13.2 per cent. Although in the early 1880s the tropical colonies’ exports to Britain had been worth only one-third of India’s exports, by 1910–12 their £32.1 million was not far behind India’s £38.1 million. As a supplier of food and raw materials to Britain they had become a very significant addition to India.

As a market for British exports they continued to be less important than India, though their annual growth rate of imports in this period was about twice that of India’s (4.2 per cent compared with 2.4 per cent) so that their relative importance had increased significantly. At an annual average of £24.6 million in 1910–12 their imports from Britain were only about onethird of India’s £72.9 million, but as most of the tropical colonies remained much more underdeveloped than India their scope for future growth was obviously much greater.

There remained also wide variations amongst the tropical colonies in their trading relations with Britain. In 1910–12 most of the West Indian and Asian colonies sent about one-quarter to one-fifth of their exports to Britain and received about the same proportion of their imports from her (see Table 5.8) though of the very large total of imports entering the Straits Settlements only 11 per cent came from Britain. The African colonies on the other hand, traded much more exclusively with Britain. No fewer than 85.8 per cent of Southern Rhodesia’s exports went to Britain, while the Gold Coast and Nigeria drew 88.7 per cent and 76.9 per cent of their imports respectively from thence.

Table 5.7 Comparison of the value of British trade with the tropical colonies and India, 1882–4 to 1910–12 (annual averages, £)
<table><tr><td>Exports</td><td>Tropical colonics</td><td>India</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Exports to Britain, 18824</td><td>11,533,525</td><td>33,629,063</td></tr><tr><td>% of total exports Exports to Britain, 191012</td><td>n.a.a 32,099,862</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td>% of total exports</td><td>n.a.</td><td>38,078,333 26.4</td></tr><tr><td>Increase, 18824 to 191012</td><td>20,566,337</td><td>4,449,270</td></tr><tr><td>% of total increasc</td><td>178.3</td><td>13.2</td></tr><tr><td>Average antual growth rate (%)</td><td>6.4</td><td>0.5</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Imports from Britain, 18824</td><td>11,335,546</td><td>43,533,750</td></tr><tr><td>% of total lmports</td><td>n,a.2$</td><td>93.1</td></tr><tr><td>Imports from Britain, 191012</td><td>24,551,274</td><td>72,897,666</td></tr><tr><td>% of total imports</td><td>n.a.a</td><td>81.9</td></tr><tr><td>% Increase, 18824 to 191012</td><td>13,215,728</td><td>29,363,916</td></tr><tr><td>% of total increase</td><td>116.6</td><td>67.5</td></tr><tr><td>Average annual growth rate (%)</td><td>1.2</td><td>2.4</td></tr></table>

a Although the exports and imports of the tropical colonies cannot be calculated accurately for reasons explained in the text, the figures are available in the appendices for many individual colonies. A few examples are given in Table 5.8. See Appendices 1 and 2 for details.

Table 5.8 Proportions of the trade of selected tropical Colonies with Britain, 1910–12
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Exports (%)</td><td>Imports (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>25.7</td><td>27.2</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>17.1</td><td>43.8</td></tr><tr><td>British Guiana</td><td>47.0</td><td>49.7</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>47.9</td><td>28.1</td></tr><tr><td>Straints Settlements</td><td>24.8</td><td>11.0</td></tr><tr><td>Southern Rhodesia</td><td>85.8</td><td>52.6</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>61.6</td><td>88.7</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>59.9</td><td>76.9</td></tr></table>

See Appendices 1 and 2 for details.

Although analysis of the trade figures reveals an important aspect of colonial development in this period, it has to be remembered that this was still a very one-sided and unbalanced process, which benefited only a minority of the population. By levying tariffs on trade, the colonial governments’ increased their revenues quite appreciably, and hence their potential for a more balanced economic and social development, if these revenues could be invested in socially fruitful ways. This trade growth was a useful, but not sufficient basis for further progress. To understand more clearly the nature and significance of the growth in overseas trade it is desirable to look at some individual countries in more detail, albeit still fairly briefly. There is not space to consider every example, but a selection of the more important countries will illuminate the main features satisfactorily. For this purpose we may look at Nigeria and Ghana in West Africa, Uganda in East Africa, and Ceylon and Malaya in Asia.

## THE GROWTH OF THE NIGERIAN ECONOMY

Nigeria had one of the most dramatic development records of the period 1900–14, as has already been shown in the trade figures. The value of its exports rose from £1,887,000 in 1900 to £6,799,000 in 1913, and in the same period the value of its impor ts rose from £1,735,000 to £6,332,000.4 In other words both exports and imports rather more than tripled in value in the short space of thirteen years; and this at a time when parts of the country were still troubled by warfare (for instance, rebellions in the south-centre by the Tiv near Mukurdi on the Benue river, and by some of the Fulani near Sokoto in the extreme northwest in 1906, threatened to disrupt the whole country, though in the event they were easily suppressed).5

The provision of even the most basic infrastructure resulted in quite remarkable increases in local production, and consequently in income. As we have seen Southern Nigeria had been producing and exporting palm oil, palm kernels, cocoa and wild rubber in appreciable quantities before 1900, but the productive capacity of Northern Nigeria had hardly been tapped owing to the absence of a cheap and efficient transport system. The rural population could produce their basic subsistence needs by working much less than a whole year. They had time on their hands which could have been put to productive use if certain exterior conditions could be met. Two of the most important of these were that there should be a market for any surplus produce they grew, and and that there should be desirable products available which they could purchase with any money thus earned. In fact, as Hopkins points out this ‘vent-for-surplus’ theory considerably oversimplifies the real situation, in which a number of complex forces were at work; but emphasises the most important economic variables.6

Thus, the extension of the railway from the port of Lagos into Northern Nigeria between 1896 and 1911 was critically important. Produce could now be cheaply shipped away for export, and the multi-tudinous products of industrial Europe could be cheaply and easily distributed by trading companies with the assistance of itinerant traders and village shopkeepers. Axes, saws, hammers, kettles, bottles, guns, bicycles and bedsteads were amongst the hosts of items for which there was a ready demand. It remained to find the export. The British hoped it would be cotton, and tried to persuade the farmers, but it turned out to be groundnuts, (more commonly known as peanuts), for which there was a burgeoning demand in Europe, and which were also a valuable local food. In Europe they had a double use. They could be pressed for their oil, which was the main ingredient in the growing margarine industry; and the residue could be used as a high-protein cattle cake for dairy cows. The prices for both these products remained generally buoyant in the Edwardian years, and the transport needs were met by the Nigerian railway, which reached Kano, the centre of the Northern Nigerian groundnut area (711 miles to the north) in 1911.7 The effect was almost miraculous, with groundnut exports rising from 790 tons in 1905 to 19,288 tons in 1913 and soaring to 127,226 tons in 1925 (see Table 5.9).

Table 5.9 Nigerian groundnut exports, 1905–25 (selected years)
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Long tons exported</td><td>Value (£)</td></tr><tr><td>1905</td><td>790</td><td>7,000</td></tr><tr><td>1912</td><td>2,518</td><td>19,000</td></tr><tr><td>1913</td><td>19,288</td><td>175,000</td></tr><tr><td>1916</td><td>50,368</td><td>474,000</td></tr><tr><td>1925</td><td>127,226</td><td>2,394,000</td></tr></table>

Source: Gerald K.Helleiner, Peasant Agriculture, Government and Economic Growth in Nigeria (Homewood, Illinois, 1966), Table 1VA-A-7 and 8.

The effect of the railway was not fully felt in 1912, but already by 1913 the tonnage exported had leapt nearly seven-fold and by 1916 by a further two and a half times; and this would no doubt have been even more if wartime shipping shortages had not artificially restricted the trade. Of course these rapid increases cannot be attributed purely to the railway. As Hopkins points out,

The Kano area had long produced grain and cotton for the market so agriculture was far from being stuck in a subsistence groove. Farmers were keen to develop a profitable export crop in order to pay taxes, to finance their trading activities in the dry season, and generally to expand their purchasing power. Agriculture in the Kano region was a subtle mixture of shifting and permanent cultivation, the latter being associated with manuring, water and soil conservation, and, wherever possible, irrigation.8

It was also important that traditional systems of land tenure did not prevent the farmers from retaining the profits, and that there was a small group of Hausa traders who were able to provide finance and advice. They had long been engaged in the trans-Sahara trade in cloth and salt, and in the Kola nut trade with the south and were always looking for new opportunities.

They contacted their established agents and suppliers in the villages around Kano, persuaded farmers to grow more groundnuts, or to grow them for the first time, offered financial assistance, and gave guarantees regarding the purchase of the harvest. The fact that the farmers were prepared to trust the Hausa traders and to treat them as opinion leaders was vital to the success of the the enterprise.9

This was a classic case of local enterprise responding quickly and favourably to the provision of infrastructure, in the way that Chamberlain had predicted. It also had a desirable knock-on effect, because Nigeria’s main source of revenue came from customs duties, and the growth of trade increased the customs revenue, which provided the finance for further extensions of the infrastructure. Governor-General Lugard began a new oceanic port in eastern Nigeria, Port Harcourt, which was opened in 1911; and planned the railway connecting it to Northern Nigeria at Kaduna, which was opened in 1926.10 Government revenue and expenditure grew rapidly in these years with revenue rising from £639,000 in 1900 to £3,327,000 in 1913, and expenditure rising from £735,000 to £2,916,000 in the same period (see Table 5.10).

Table 5.10 Nigerian government revenue and expenditure (selected years)
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Gross revenue (£)</td><td>Customs revenue (£)</td><td>Gross expenditure (£)</td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td>639,000</td><td>601,000</td><td>735,000</td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td>1,673,000</td><td>1,262,000</td><td>1,716,000</td></tr><tr><td>1913</td><td>3,327,000</td><td>1,773,000</td><td>2,916,000</td></tr></table>

Source: Helleiner, Peasant Agriculture, Table V-E-3.

The total sums involved were still relatively small, but the rates of growth were impressive, and were not affected by inflation as we have seen. The rising revenue also enabled the Nigerian government to borrow money in London under the Colonial Stocks Act, and by 1914 £9,656,476 had been spent on railways alone by this means. The total debt stood at nearly £10.8 million in 1919.11 In addition to railways the government had built 2,000 miles of motorable roads by 1914, had begun electricity undertakings in Lagos, had opened coal mines in Enugu in Eastern Nigeria and had introduced a postal and telegraph system and a uniform currency.12

## THE COCOA TRADE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOLD COAST (GHANA)

Like Nigeria, Ghana was also making rapid progress in this period, in some ways even more impressive than in Nigeria, although more narrowly based, since Ghana’s economic growth was increasingly dependent on one export, cocoa beans, (although gold was also important) whereas Nigeria’s exports were more evenly spread amongst palm produce, cocoa, groundnuts, timber and tin. Just as Nigeria had found an important new export in groundnuts, so Ghana had in cocoa; and the case of cocoa was even more remarkable because unlike groundnuts it was not an indigenous crop, but an import from the Americas.13 The Basel missionaries had introduced trees experimentally in the early 1860s at their agricultural station at Akropong in the forested hills 30 miles to the north of Accra, but these trees had failed. Cocoa was first successfully introduced to Ghana on a commercial basis by an Accra goldsmith, Tetteh Quarshie, who smuggled in some seeds from the Spanish island of Fernando Po, and grew them successfully at his farm at Mampong, near Akropong. Interestingly Quarshie had been educated by the Basel missionaries, and seems to have been encouraged by them to experiment with cocoa cultivation.14

However that might be, farmers in the Akropong area, who had previously exported palm oil, were looking for a new product and began to take an interest in cocoa in the 1890s. They migrated in groups westwards into Akim Abuakwa, where they purchased unoccupied forest land, and planted cocoa trees. From the beginning the farms were quite large, and the operation engendered the growth of local capitalism in Southeastern Ghana.15

The demand for chocolate in Europe and America was strong, prices were good, and European trading companies were soon actively buying. The government assisted with the distribution of seed, and built a railway north of Accra, which helped with transport (it carried 20,648 tons of cocoa in 1911);16 but compared with the enterprise and initiative of the local cocoa farmers, the contribution of expatriate agencies was minimal.17 The responsiveness of the local farmers exceeded all expectations, with the value of cocoa exports rising from £27,000 in 1900 to £2,489,000 in 1913, and to £8,222,000 in 1925 (see Table 5.11).

At the same time, gold mining, which was an enclave sector, entirely dependent on foreign capital, raised its export earnings from £596,000 in

Table 5.11 Gold Coast cocoa exports (selected years)
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Tons exported</td><td>Value (£s)</td></tr><tr><td>1900</td><td>500</td><td>27,000</td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td>9,500</td><td>515,000</td></tr><tr><td>1913</td><td>51,300</td><td>2,489,000</td></tr><tr><td>1916</td><td>72,000</td><td>3,848,000</td></tr><tr><td>1925</td><td>218,000</td><td>8,222,000</td></tr></table>

Source: Geoffrey B.Kay, The Political Economy of Colonialism in Ghana (Cambridge, 1972), pp.334–6.

1905 to £1,626,000 in 1913, but saw its share of total export earnings fall from 43.9% in 1905 to 33.9% in 1913. In 1913 cocoa accounted for 51.9% of export earnings.18

As with Nigeria, the rapid growth in overseas trade was reflected in government revenue, and expenditure, both of which roughly doubled between 1904 and 1913 with revenue rising from £682,000 to £1,302,000, and expenditure from £537,000 to £1,193,300 (see Table 5.12).

Table 5.12 Gold Coast government revenue and expenditure (selected years)
<table><tr><td>Year</td><td>Gross revenue (£)</td><td>Customs revenue (£)</td><td>Gross expenditure (£)</td><td>Development expenditure (£)</td></tr><tr><td>1904</td><td>682,000</td><td>384,000</td><td>537,500</td><td>10,600</td></tr><tr><td>1907</td><td>709,000</td><td>114,000</td><td>530,900</td><td>34,000</td></tr><tr><td>1913</td><td>1,302,000</td><td>780,000</td><td>1,193,300</td><td>228,100</td></tr></table>

Source: As for Table 5.11 , pp. 348 and 360.

Impressive though these growth rates were, they still represented very small sums in per capita terms. For instance in 1911, Gold Coast government expenditure amounted to only £0.46 per head, and Nigerian only £0.165, and inevitably the amount of development which could be financed from such small sums was strictly limited. Nevertheless, a start was being made in countries where almost nothing had been done before.

Kay sums up the development situation in Ghana between 1898 and 1919 as follows:

The construction of a railway system was the main economic activity of the colonial government during this period, which opens with the construction of the Secondi—Kumasi line (1898–1904). Between 1909 and 1917 the second line was built, from Accra to Kumasi, and by 1920 there were 250 miles of track open in the colony. Expenditure on railways accounted for 24 per cent of total government expenditure and 88 per cent of expenditure on economic services during this period. Health and education accounted for 9.7 and 2.4 per cent respectively of total government expenditure. A rough estimate of the development of these services by 1920 is that the health service provided hospital facilities for about 0.02 per cent of the population, while one child in more than 200 had the opportunity of attending school.19

## CHANGE IN EAST AFRICA: UGANDA

On the other side of Africa, Uganda enjoyed an experience similar to that of Northern Nigeria. Much of the country is over 600 miles from the sea at Mombasa, and like Kano, Kampala was connected to the coast by a single-line railway, which proved to be the lifeline which made possible the development of an extensive export trade, this time in cotton. At the time that it became a British protectorate in 1894, Uganda was something of an embarrassment, because its economy was extremely simple, and the amount of revenue which could be raised by taxation was minuscule in relation to the costs of administration—even when these were kept to an absolute minimum. In consequence a grantin-aid from the imperial Treasury was required, and although this was always quite modest, its elimination remained a priority of the British government. For instance in 1900–1 the Ugandan Government spent £252,000, of which it was able to raise only £82,000 in local taxation, and received a grant-in-aid of £204,000. The total value of its exports, which consisted mainly of ivory, was a mere £25,000.20 Clearly if the Ugandan government was going to spend any money on development, let alone pay its yearly running costs, some means of dramatically increasing its revenue needed to be found, and an export crop was the obvious and essential starting point.

Initially no one knew what this should be and many recommendations were made. Cotton was amongst these at a time when a world shortage had almost doubled its price between 1903 and 1904. The Ganda chiefs were attracted by the idea that their people should grow a cash crop, much of whose value could be transferred to them; so they pressed their tribesmen into cotton cultivation with such success that by 1914–15 the value of cotton exports had reached £369,999 out of total Ugandan exports of £523,000. This raised the government’s revenue to £282,000 and reduced the grant-in-aid to a mere £10,000.21 This was a remarkable achievement which was obtained within a single decade. Nevertheless, the lack of internal transport facilities in Uganda remained a severe problem. The railway to the coast began at Kisumu in Kenya, and although steamers on Lake Victoria Nyanza provided cheap transport from Uganda to Kisumu, cotton and other produce had still to be expensively carried to the lakeshore ports by foot porters carrying head loads since the prevalence of tsetse flies made it impossible to keep draught animals and there were as yet no roads for motor lorries (or any lorries either).22

This was a problem which had been worrying the Colonial Office for some time, and was highlighted by the visit of Winston Churchill, then under-secretary of state, to Uganda in 1907. Churchill was struck by the need for better transport, and realising that private companies were unlikely to be interested at the time when the cotton export trade was not yet properly established, he advocated government-owned railways, saying rather surprisingly that he was in favour of ‘a practical experiment in State Socialism’. The colonial secretary, Lord Elgin eventually agreed to ask the Treasury for a loan of £500,000 from the Local Loans Fund to build a railway from the port of Jinja on the lake, westwards to Kasese, near the border with the Belgian Congo, to encourage cotton production. The officials in the Colonial Office did not think this scheme had much chance of overcoming Treasury caution and were quite surprised when a loan of £200,000 was finally agreed in 1909. This was not enough to finance the railway to Kasese but was sufficient to build a line 46 miles northwards from Jinja to the nearest navigable port on the Nile at Namasagali. This railway was opened in 1912, and greatly facilitated transport in an area where cotton cultivation was spreading rapidly. It showed that some development risks were worth taking.23

In his summary of the Uganda experience Cyril Ehrlich notes that although it was still very limited before 1914, there were definite signs of progress, which had diffused widely amongst the small farmers, who were the most numerous class in Uganda. The old fear of famine had been banished, and the men had exchanged warfare and political intrigue for cotton cultivation, (food crops were still produced by women). The people were ‘consistently, if not more nutritiously fed, better clothed, and better housed’. In addition they ‘enjoyed the small but significant luxuries of oil-lighting, sugar, tea, perhaps a bicycle’.24 They were also beginning to have some access to another much-coveted need—European-style education, which many of them felt was the key to entering the modern world of science and technology, which had broken so suddenly and unexpectedly upon them. Uganda is another example of a country where a very limited infrastructural investment before 1914 had brought a most gratifying return, even if it was still quite modest.

## CEYLON (NOW SRILANKA) AND THE TEA TRADE

Across the Indian Ocean in Ceylon, economic development was also progressing quite rapidly in the Edwardian era, although there it was not so firmly based on the indigenous peoples. After the failure of coffee cultivation, owing to attacks of coffee leaf disease in the 1880s, the European planters in the central hill area switched to new crops, of which tea and rubber were the most important. The expansion of tea cultivation and tea exports was extremely rapid. Starting from virtually nothing in the 1880s, tea exports were worth $\mathcal { L } 5 , 6 6 0 , 0 0 0$ in 1911, when they far surpassed all rivals in value. The average share of the leading exports in the years 1907–11 inclusive was tea 52.4 per cent, rubber 9.9 per cent and coconut oil 9.0 per cent. Between 1903 and 1912 the total value of Ceylon’s exports rose from £7,251,000 to £12,135,000, and imports rose from £7,751,000 to £10,960,000 (1911). This was of course reflected in the government’s revenue, which was primarily derived from customs duties. It rose from £1,962,000 in 1902 to £3,498,000 in 1913, and enabled the government to borrow relatively extensively for development projects like railways, irrigation, roads and education. By 1911 Ceylon’s outstanding debt under the Colonial Stocks Act stood at $\textstyle \mathcal { L } 5 , 4 2 6 , 0 0 0 .$ .25

The main development need was for transport and communications since the expanding tea industry was located in the mountainous centre of the countr y, south of K andy, and this area was extremely inaccessible without railways, which were needed not only for shipping tea to the port of Colombo, but also for transporting the many articles needed by tea planters and their employees. These latter were mainly Tamil labourers, imported from South India, who required to be fed. The expansion of tea and rubber cultivation thus had an indirect spinoff advantage for the indigenous Sinhalese cultivators, since the domestic market for their food production was greatly enlarged. They thus increased the production and sale of their traditional crops, vegetables and fruits. The staples were rice, coconuts (whose oil was used for cooking) plantains, yams, manioc, peas and beans. In addition chillies, onions, breadfruit, pawpaws and citrus fruits were widely grown. Because so many people were vegetarians, and because animal diseases like rinderpest were rife, the demand for livestock produce was fairly small, but the production of eggs, chickens, goats and fish was considerably expanded.26

With buoyant tea prices after 1895, demands for an expansion of the transport network into the interior were strong, and proposals for a major expansion of the railway network by Governor West Ridgeway were sympathetically received at the Colonial Office, whose officials urged the Treasury not to oppose the scheme. Kesner illustrates this by quoting a memorandum of 1895 by Charles Lucas, then a first class clerk in the Colonial Office and a rising man. Lucas wrote that

Ceylon and the other Eastern Colonies are countries in the making or remaking and the greatest happiness of their inhabitants is it seems to me promoted not by economising, unless it is absolutely necessary, nor by doing away with taxes, but by laying out money on water, roads, railways, and other works.27

Even so, Joseph Chamberlain found it necessary to reduce the scope of the governor’s railway scheme and in April 1898 he

asked the governor to accept a less expensive rail network combined with a programme of economic diversification. In this regard, he looked to the future, advocating the adoption of a plan that would meet Ceylon’s immediate needs for better transport while providing later colonial administrations the fiscal flexibility to pursue other types of economic development progress.28

Under the approved scheme Ceylon’s railway operating mileage was more than doubled, increasing from 297 miles in 1901 to 671 miles in 1914. During the same period the quantity of freight carried on the island’s railways also virtually doubled, rising from 520,639 tons to 999,943 tons.

Expenditure on other aspects of development was not on such a large scale, but problems of health and education were concerning the more conscientious officials serving in Ceylon, as is revealed by the well-known author, Leonard Woolf in his autobiography. His view is particularly interesting as he was later a prominent member of the Fabian Society and a trenchant critic of imperialism in his book Empire and Commerce in Africa (1920). He was assistant government agent in the poor and remote district of Hambantota in Southern Ceylon between August 1908 and May 1911. He became devoted to the place and its people and wrote that

I rarely thought of anything else except the District and the people, to increase their prosperity, diminish the poverty and disease, start irrigation works, open schools.29

He was particularly proud of his work in connection with education and his last act before leaving Ceylon was to visit some schools in Hambantota, where ‘I had built and opened a Government Tamil school in the town and had made primary education compulsory’.30

## PROGRESS IN MALAYA

Finally, we may look briefly at Malaya, the tropical colony whose export sector was in many ways the richest and most highly developed of all in 1914. This can be seen if we compare the five tropical colonies which had the largest governmental revenues just before the First World War, where Malaya’s £6,147,000 was more than double Ceylon’s £3,022,000 and was well ahead of Nigeria’s £2,571,000, Jamaica’s £1,352,000 and the Gold Coast’s £1,112,000 (see Table 5.13).

Table 5.13 The five tropical colonies with the highest revenues in 1911
<table><tr><td>Country</td><td>Revenue (£m)</td><td>Population (m)</td><td>Revenue per head (fm)</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>6.147</td><td>2.653</td><td>2.32</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>3,022</td><td>4.106</td><td>0.74</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>2.571</td><td>17.131</td><td>0.15</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>1.352</td><td>0.831</td><td>1.63</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>1.112</td><td>1.502</td><td>0.74</td></tr></table>

a Includes the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay States, and the Protected Malay States. The revenue of Trengganu is not known but has been estimated at one-half that of neighbouring Kelantan, which had roughly twice the population. The Trengganu revenue is thus estimated at £25,000. Even if this is too large it is still a trivial proportion of the total Malayan revenues.  
Sources: B.R.Mitchell, International Historical Statistics, Africa and Asia (London, 1982); Richard Kesner, Economic Control and Colonial Development (London, 1981), and The Oxford Survey of the British Empire, Vol. II, Asia (Oxford, 1914).

The Malayan revenue and population has been obtained by adding together those of the Straits Settlements of Singapore, Pahang, Malacca and the Dindings with the Federated Malay States of Perak, Selangor, Negri Sembilan, and Pahang, and the Protected Malay States of Johore, Kedah, Perlis, Kelantan and Trengganu; for despite the variations by which British control was exercised they were all being effectively merged into one economic unit by the extension of British commercial law, currency and banking, telegraphs, railways and all the other socio-economic links which were being developed between them.

The contrast between Malaya and Ceylon is even more in Malaya’s favour if the comparison is made on a per capita basis, for each Malayan yielded £2.6s.4d (£2.32) in taxation, and each Sinhalese only 14s.8d (£0.74). In neither case of course were any considerable direct taxes paid, the great bulk of both colonies’ revenues being derived from customs duties. It has to be remembered of course that revenue per head is not the same thing as income per head, and as the population of the Federated Malay States, where the great majority of the tin mines and rubber plantations were located, rose from 678,600 in 1901 to 1,037,000 in 1911, (52.8 per cent) it is quite possible that income per head did not rise at all, illustrating once again that increases in foreign trade, no matter how impressive, made only a very one-sided contribution to development. This is emphasised by the fact that much of the population growth came from Chinese and Indian labourers who were paid very low wages.31

The growth of the Malayan economy was very rapid in the Edwardian period, especially in the Federated Malay States (FMS) after they were joined together in 1895, because it was in these states that the great majority of the tin mines and rubber plantations were located and on whose remarkably rapid growth the economy depended. The trade of the Straits Settlements also grew very rapidly in this period, but this was principally based on exports from and imports to the FMS. The huge rise in the population of the FMS came mainly from the immigration of Chinese and Indian labourers to work in the tin mines and rubber plantations, but the Malay population also increased by 34.3 per cent at the same time.32

Table 5.14 World rubber exports, 1911–14 (in tons)
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Year</td><td colspan="2">Wild rubber</td><td colspan="3">Cultivated rubber</td></tr><tr><td>South America</td><td>Africa</td><td>Malaya</td><td>Others&quot;</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>1911</td><td>58,271</td><td>18,283</td><td>10,800</td><td>6,300</td><td>93,654</td></tr><tr><td>1912</td><td>62,025</td><td>18,918</td><td>20,300</td><td>11,800</td><td>113,070</td></tr><tr><td>1913</td><td>50,493</td><td>15,986</td><td>33,600</td><td>19,800</td><td>119,879</td></tr><tr><td>1914</td><td>40,867</td><td>7,19</td><td>47,000</td><td>28,700</td><td>124,286</td></tr></table>

a Mainly Indonesia and Ceylon  
Source: Adapted from John H.Drabble, Rubber in Malaya 1876–1922 (OUP, Kuala Lumpur, 1973) p. 106.

The growth of the economy was most clearly reflected in the trade statistics, as previously noted. Tin ore exports from the FMS had grown strongly in the 1890s, reaching 47,475 tons in 1901 and they levelled out in the next decade, and were slightly lower in 1911, at 44,148 tons; but the slack was more than taken up by the booming rubber industry. No rubber had been exported from Malaya in 1901, but by 1911 exports had reached 10,800 tons and by 1914 had leapt to 47,000 tons. In 1911 Malaya’s share of world rubber exports was already 11.5 per cent. By 1914 it had soared to 37.8 per cent. Malaya’s rise was mainly at the expense of South America and Africa (see Table 5.14).

A number of factors were responsible for Malaya’s rise as a rubber producer. Expanded demand for motor car tyres was reflected in rapid price rises. The London average price rose from 3s 6d (£0.17 1/2) per pound in 1897 to 8s.9d (£0.75 3/4) in 1910, before sinking to 2s 3 1/2d (£0.11 1/2) in 1914, but by that time the huge increase in the acreage of rubber trees guaranteed continued high production, despite falling prices.33 On the supply side, the Malayan government provided access to virgin land at low prices, and freely distributed the seeds of the Hevea rubber trees (developed at Kew Gardens from Brazilian originals). In addition investors in London and Singapore were anxious to supply capital and management, while Tamil labourers from South India were willing to come to Malaya to work on the plantations and were actively encouraged by the Indian and

Malayan governments to do so. The rise in the acreage of rubber trees in Malaya was remarkable. In 1897 there were only 345 acres, all in the FMS. By 1914 there were 1,168,000 acres with some in every Malayan state, ranging from 471,050 in the FMS to 1,802 in Trengganu the last state to take up rubber plantations.34

The construction of roads, railways, hospitals, and water supplies, etc. was an essential part of the process and one where the state was prepared to take the lead ahead of developments, in order to ensure that expansion continued.35 Sir Frank Swettenham, who was Resident-General in the FMS from 1896 to 1901, and governor and commander-in-chief of the Straits Settlements from 1901 to 1904, summed up this aspect of his work in the FMS in 1906:

a country which, in 1874, had no post office and had never seen a postage stamp, in 1904 dealt with about 10,000,000 covers, issued money orders to the value of over \$1,250,000 [Straits \$ worth 2s 4d] had \$275,000 in the Post Office Savings Banks, and maintained over 2,000 miles of telegraph wires. In the same year the prisons received 10,000 prisoners, the hospitals treated 46,000 in-patients and 130,000 out-patients at a cost of over £50,000 a year, and the schools were attended by over 13,000 scholars. In 1875 the States did not possess a mile of first class road, but in 1904 there were over 2,500 miles, the greater part of which will compare favourably with the roads in any country, while 340 miles of the railway, built at a cost of \$32,000,000, were open for traffic, and, when the present extensions are completed, the Federation will have constructed and equipped close on 500 miles of railways, out of current revenue, without borrowing a farthing. Indeed, the Government balances at the end of 1905 amounted to no less than \$22,000,000. It may be questioned whether it is possible to find, in the history of British administration over-seas, a parallel to this record.36

Sir Frank Swettenham was certainly not a man to hide his light under a bushel, but he did have cause for some legitimate pride, and all the indicators he mentioned continued to expand up to 1914. For instance, the railway mileage had reached 822 miles by that date.37

On the other hand, it is clear that most of the advantages of economic development were being realised by the European, Chinese, and Indian communities, and that the advantages to the indigenous Malayan population were rather more indirect. They were no doubt alarmed to note that by 1911 they were no longer a majority in the FMS. At that date the census revealed that there were 420,840 Malays (40.5 per cent of the total population) compared with 433,200 Chinese (41.8 per cent) and 172,500 Indians (16.6 per cent; see Table 5.15).

The British authorities repeatedly stated that their aim was to benefit the Malayan people and no doubt they had to derive what reassurance they could from that; and from the indirect economic benefits that came with development. The Malays were primarily farmers on a small scale, and the expansion of the food market, especially for rice, vegetables and fruits, in the growing towns like Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Pahang, enabled them to participate in the new export economy at a supporting level, and to increase their incomes by raising cash crops. In Swettenham’s words ‘The Malays are rice growers and planters of cocoanuts [sic] and other fr uit trees, and it is ver y satisfactory to know that in the last thirty years these cultivations have been enormously extended’.38 However, as noted in the previous chapter, the Malayan farmers were not as successful as rice growers as Swettenham liked to believe, and the alienation of much of their best land for foreign-owned tin mines and rubber plantations made the rapid commercialisation of the Malayan economy a very mixed blessing for many of them.

But it was the phenomenal growth of rubber cultivation in the years before 1914, which was the motor powering Malayan economic development; and in his final comments (in 1973) on its effects on the economy, Drabble noted its two-sided role. On the one hand it had led to a huge growth in commercial activities and services, and to the impressive infrastructural development already described; but on the other

it is somewhat ironic that Malaya’s leading role in rubber-growing, one of the outstanding agricultural enterprises of the twentieth century, at the same time placed her firmly in the group of primary producing countries which are today categorised as less-developed39

However, in the heady days between 1905 and 1914, the tangible advantages of rapid economic development would have been much more prominent.

## THE NATURE OF EARLY DEVELOPMENT: SUCCESSES AND IMPEDIMENTS

With the benefit of hindsight it is now clear that the years before 1914 represented something of a high point in the development of the tropical colonies. The markets for their exports had been rapidly growing and the undiversified nature of their economies had not yet become a problem: when cheap manufactures were so easy to import from Britain, Europe and America, the absence of indigenous industries did not seem so important, especially as their exports of primary products were expanding so satisfactorily and were bringing so much prosperity with them; even if this was not equally distributed. Even so with much export income going to peasant producers (as with Gold Coast cocoa, Nigerian groundnuts and Ugandan cotton, for instance) the distribution of the gains was more equal than it was in places like South America, where large estate owners were considerably more prominent.

Table 5.15 Ethnic composition of the population of the Federated Malay States in 1911
<table><tr><td></td><td>No.</td><td>%o</td></tr><tr><td>Malays</td><td>420,840</td><td>40.5</td></tr><tr><td>Chinese</td><td>433,200</td><td>41.8</td></tr><tr><td>Indian</td><td>172,500</td><td>16.6</td></tr><tr><td>European</td><td>3,290</td><td>0.3</td></tr><tr><td>Eurasians</td><td>2,650</td><td>0.25</td></tr></table>

Source: Oxford Survey of the British Empire, vol. II, Asia, p. 481.

There were, however, some signs that the rapid development of the pre-war years might not be sustained. In particular there is some evidence that capital supplies, curiously enough from Britain in particular, were becoming difficult to obtain. For instance, between 1910 and 1913 the Admiralty became worried about oil supplies for the navy (which had recently converted from coal-fired to oil-fired ships) and wished to develop oil fields which would be firmly under British control in the event of war (as the then important Rumanian oil fields were not). The Persian (Iranian) oil fields were operated by a British company (the Anglo-Persian Company) but the fields were still undeveloped and not in British territory, so Trinidad seemed like a good prospect as it was a British colony which was very poor, and in need of an export staple. The difficulty was to find a British company which would undertake to develop the oil fields. The main contender was a consortium of companies, known as the United British West Indies Petroleum Syndicate Ltd, which included a number of foreign interests about whom the Admiralty were worried. In particular they were concerned that the Shell Company, which was 60 per cent Dutch owned, was involved; since the possibility of the Germans buying out the Dutch share was taken seriously at the time.

The Admiralty tried to circumvent the syndicate by entering into negotiations with two British companies, Consolidated Gold Fields of South Africa, chaired by Lord Harris, and S.Pearson and Son, chaired by Lord Cowdray, in the hope that they would be prepared to develop the oil fields, but both declined on the grounds that they would be unable to market the oil without Shell’s cooperation. In the event the

Admiralty’s fears about the foreign elements in the syndicate (which were French and Russian as well as Dutch) proved groundless and a lease of 200,000 acres was made to them in 1913 for a fifty-year period with the right to negotiate for thirty more years. As a result of the Colonial Office’s rather weak bargaining position it was not able to obtain very good terms for Trinidad. For instance, royalties were only two shillings a ton on the first 100,000 tons, and one shilling and sixpence on all higher tonnages. A rent of fifteen shillings an acre was paid on all land being worked for oil, but the Trinidad government agreed not to tax oil exports, or oil underground values, and not to exercise its right of pre-emption (on which the Admiralty had insisted) except in war or emergency.40

Another example relates to British Guiana, where a Mr Evan Wong, a citizen of the colony, had been granted exclusive rights to mine bauxite and had sold these to two American companies, the Maritime Chemical Company of Boston, Massachusetts and the Southern Aluminium Company of Whitney, North Carolina. When war broke out in 1914, the Colonial Office became worried that the then neutral American companies might sell aluminium from British Guiana to the Germans who could use it in armaments production. The Colonial Office therefore wanted a British company to buy the rights back from the American companies. However, all the British companies with whom the Colonial Office negotiated refused to invest money in British Guiana. Eventually a Canadian company, the Northern Aluminium Company of Canada, which was also registered in Britain, was persuaded to enter into an agreement with the two American companies whereby they entered a ‘British’ consortium.41

Even when British companies were willing to invest capital in the tropical colonies, the colonial administrators’ concept of ‘trusteeship’ sometimes caused them to block such proposals. One of the best known examples of this occurred when William Lever, the great soap magnate, sought to obtain concessions of land in Nigeria and Sierra Leone in 1907 to develop palm oil plantations, but the colonial governments refused to agree, and he turned instead to the Belgian Congo where he was granted a substantial concession in 1911.42 In defence of the colonial governments, though, it has to be remembered that peasant production of palm oil and palm kernels was very buoyant at that time, and alienation of land in the relatively densely populated palm belts of Southern Nigeria and Sierra Leone would have created resentment and political unrest for which there was no strong justification at that time; even if the case for plantations became stronger after 1920, when Congolese, Malayan and Indonesian plantations offered powerful competition to peasant producers.43

These examples not only illustrate the difficulties of procuring capital for colonial development, but also show that the problem of dependence on international capital supplies is by no means a new one.

Finally, how should the record of development under colonial rule in the years before 1914 be assessed? These were the early years for many of the colonies, especially the African ones, and it might thus seem that it would not be surprising if achievements were rather limited, but paradoxically for many of the colonies this was the period when their economies grew more rapidly than before or since. Of course fast growth does not necessarily mean development, although it can be a very helpful pre-condition for it. It has to be remembered that the world’s trading economy was expanding very quickly in the period 1903–14 anyway, and that the demand for many tropical products was strong, so that to some extent these areas would have been involved in economic growth even if they had not become colonies.

On the other hand colonial rule certainly speeded up their integration into the world economy by providing a stable political environment and by providing a very basic infrastructure of railways, roads, telegraphs, banks, currency, hospitals, schools, etc. The fact the private capital could not be induced to build railways in the colonies, and that the colonial governments were forced to do it, suggests that without colonial rule economic development might have been considerably slower.

Conversely proconsuls like Swettenham and Lugard tended to exaggerate the importance of the innovations which they introduced, and to equate mere trade growth with the much more complex problem of achieving balanced and comprehensive development. Even in this period of rapid trade growth the incomes of most of the inhabitants of the tropical colonies remained pitifully small and their standard of living abysmally low. Also trade growth tended to benefit some regions more than (and sometimes at the expense of) other regions, transferring labour and capital to the more favoured regions, often coastal, at the expense of the interior parts. The resulting regional disparities were often very severe and made the problem of securing a balanced and equitable development more difficult.

So in conclusion, while it is important to recognise the role that colonial rule played in laying down a basis for future development, it is also necessary to acknowledge the very limited nature of the achievement, even before 1914, in the period which was in many ways the heyday of colonial rule.44 Unfortunately many of the one-sided aspects of development which commenced in this period were never overcome, with serious consequences, to which we must now turn.
