> 来源：Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden)\Colonialism and Development Britain and Its Tropical Colonies, 1850-1960 (M. Havinden).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The economics of ‘trusteeship’ Colonial development policy, 1921–9

British g overnment funds for any kind of colonial economic development up to the early 1920s were meagre. Table 7.1 sets out the major loans and grants according to the Treasury’s accounts. Over 90 per cent of the funds provided went to railway construction, nearly all of it in East and Central Africa. All but 2 per cent of the financial assistance was in the form of loans, the interest payments on which had to be met from the start of the loan period. This was not a satisfactory record in the view of the imperialists who took charge of colonial affairs during and after the First World War: Lord Milner, Leopold Amery, William Ormsby-Gore and J.H.Thomas.1 Their aim was to provide more money, possibly on easier terms, in a more comprehensive programme of colonial development. As the unemployment situation in Britain deteriorated in the early 1920s the need for Britain to take measures to stimulate colonial economic development could be portrayed as being more urgent.2

## COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY AND THE POLITICS OF UNEMPLOYMENT

By 1921 it was becoming clear that the industrial dislocation and high levels of unemployment of 1919 and 1920 were not temporary phenomena caused by the return to peacetime conditions, but a more fundamental problem requiring vigorous action. The unemployment crisis also brought the problems of colonial development to the Cabinet’s attention, for it seemed clear to the government that one aspect of the problem was a lack of demand for British goods and that the colonial empire might become an important source of orders. The Colonial Office assured the Cabinet in October 1921 that ‘everything possible is being done to enable the Colonies to make a substantial contribution towards the immediate problem of placing orders in this country’. In addition to immediate orders the colonial empire would be raising £25 million for schemes already contemplated, plus a further £20 million if the colonies in question could raise the necessary loans. Finally, a further £17,500,000 could be expended if ‘a Treasury guarantee, a free grant or any other form of Treasury assistance was given’. The secretar y of state, Winston Churchill, envisaged considerable benefits arising from imperial government assistance:

Table 7.1 Financial assistance to colonial development by the British government, 1896–1923
<table><tr><td>Purpose</td><td>Date(s)</td><td>Recipient</td><td colspan="3">£000</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Loans</td><td>Grants</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Railway Construction</td><td>1896-1905</td><td>Uganda</td><td>5503</td><td></td><td>5503</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>191013</td><td>Uganda</td><td>295</td><td></td><td>295</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>191215</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>180</td><td></td><td>180</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>186</td><td></td><td>186</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>191213</td><td>Kenya</td><td>375</td><td></td><td>375</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>19212</td><td>Tanganyika</td><td>105</td><td></td><td>105</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>191013</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>200</td><td></td><td>200</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>6844</td><td></td><td>6844</td></tr><tr><td>Public Works</td><td>1921-2</td><td>Uganda</td><td>400</td><td></td><td>400</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>19212</td><td>Tanganyika</td><td>37</td><td></td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>18978</td><td>Dominica</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>18978</td><td>St Vincent</td><td></td><td>15</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>437</td><td>30</td><td>467</td></tr><tr><td>Research</td><td>190623</td><td>Imperial</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Institute, etc.</td><td></td><td>127</td><td>127</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Grand Total</td><td>7281</td><td>157</td><td>7408</td></tr></table>

Source: Memorandum from Treasury to Colonial Office, June 1923, CO 323 905 20593.

A large amount of work would be provided in this country without delay, for it would, of course, be a condition of Imperial assistance that any plant or materials required should be ordered in this country. The works would benefit the colony, develop markets for British goods, and enhance the purchasing power of individual inhabitants in the Colonies, with future benefits to British trade.3

Others in the Cabinet were not convinced. The Treasury view was that Crown colonies did not in fact have any great difficulty in raising loans in the London market, and that making grants to colonies ‘would be putting the colonies into a better position than the public utility undertakings at home’.4

This was as far as the demand for financial assistance to colonies which wanted to raise loans reached in 1921. The question continued to be pursued, notably by Leo Amery in 1922. In August he pointed out that since 1920 the colonial empire had raised loans amounting to $\mathcal { L } 3 4$ million and a further $\mathcal { L } 1 0$ million would be borrowed by the end of 1923. Much of this had been and was being spent in the United Kingdom. This, however, was the limit of the colonies’ unaided efforts. On the other hand, there were many development projects, especially for railway construction in East and West Africa and British Guiana, which might ultimately prove remunerative ‘but for which none of the Governments concerned could venture to make themselves responsible, unless not only the interest, but also the capital—or at any rate as much of it as represented materials bought in this country—were found by the Imperial Treasury as a free gift’.5

In October 1922, he advanced the view to Cabinet that the empire was potentially highly valuable but that it had never been ‘systematically developed’. What was needed was a flexible, continuous and long-term programme of development offering ‘substantial inducements’ to governments, public authorities or private companies to undertake at once schemes which would normally be started over the next decade, including those which might not prove remunerative for many years ‘and which a poor and struggling Colonial Government could not venture to take up unless both the immediate cost and the future risk were reduced to a minimum’. To effect this he suggested an Empire Development Bill should be introduced authorising the expenditure of $\mathcal { L } 1 0$ million per annum for fifteen years for the promotion of development schemes. An ‘Imperial Development Advisory Board’ should be set up to administer the schemes. Assistance would consist of grants of interest, guarantees for loans raised by colonial governments, and direct subsidies up to 50 per cent of the value of orders placed in the United Kingdom. The kinds of schemes envisaged were those for transport facilities, irrigation, power supply and similar public utilities, and Amery made special note of the necessity to prevent the Treasury from exercising control over the schemes and subjecting them to criticism ‘based solely on the desire to prevent expenditure’.6

No action was taken, but the question came up at the Imperial Economic Conference which took place in October and November 1923. Although discussion was related mainly to dominion problems rather than those of the colonial territories, they were included when the empire countries were invited to consider a proposal whereby they would submit schemes of economic development which the imperial government would facilitate by grants of interest on the necessary loans, up to a maximum of three-quarters of the interest for five years. On behalf of the colonial empire, William Ormsby-Gore, parliamentary under-secretary of state, welcomed the proposals, but warned that their success would depend entirely on the conditions imposed: ‘if it means Treasury control I am afraid it does not mean Colonial development. That has been our experience in the past’.7

In November, however, the Cabinet Committee on Unemployment recorded the view that

in present circumstances the arrangements adopted by the Imperial Economic Conference would not result in any appreciable development in the Colonies and Protectorates…and it was suggested that Colonial development on a substantial scale could best be obtained by setting aside a capital sum of £20,000,000 for the purpose.8

This suggestion was vigorously resisted by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, who wrote to the committee:

It seems to me premature to assume without further evidence or argument that the extremely generous proposals which we submitted to the Imperial Economic Conference will be quite ineffective in stimulating the development of the Colonies…and to embark upon an inquiry of which the object is presumably to formulate even more generous terms of assistance—which I should have the greatest difficulty in accepting.9

By December it was apparent that the only replies to the economic conference’s proposals had been from the small colonies, and all of them were negative. The Colonial Office then suggested a scheme for railway building in Kenya and Uganda to cost about £6 million, which the Committee on Unemployment regarded as ‘promising’.10 In January 1924 the Labour government, which had won the general election in December 1923, took office, and the new Cabinet Committee on Unemployment took stock of the situation. Legislation was drafted to implement the conference’s proposals for an extension of the Trade Facilities Act to include grants of up to three-quarters of interest for a maximum of five years. The previous Unemployment Committee’s approval of the Kenya-Uganda railway scheme was accepted and the committee recommended a loan of £3,500,000 interest free for five years and repayable over thirtyseven years. The committee felt that the scheme would not only relieve unemployment but also ‘contribute materially towards the solution of the British cotton shortage problem’.11 Arrangements for the loan were introduced in the Colonial Office estimates presented to Parliament on 25 February 1924.12

The new government also had before them the report of a committee set up in July 1923 under the chairmanship of Lord Ronaldshay, to consider what role private enterprise had to play in the existing and future transportation services of East and West Africa.13 This report concluded that there was no further scope at present for railway building in West Africa, but that a number of desirable projects in East Africa—especially the extension of the Nyasaland railway from the Shire Highlands to Lake Nyasa—were being held up for want of funds. None of these projects, however, was within the capabilities of private enterprise. The report stated:

There is, indeed, little reason to suppose that private firms will be found willing to finance, construct and operate railways unaided by Government in the present stage of development of Tropical Africa.14

The terms of reference of the committee did not include discussion of which railways should be built and how they should be financed, and in a minority report, Sir Edwin Stockton MP, called for another inquiry, ‘to consider ways of developing our Tropical African Dependencies other than those with which we were called on to deal’.15

It was partly in response to the Ronaldshay Report and Stockton’s comments that one of the terms of reference of another commission of inquiry into East Africa, the establishment of which was announced by the secretary of state for the colonies, J.H.Thomas, in April 1924, included a consideration of the measures to be taken to promote the general economic development of the British East African dependencies.16

Meanwhile the process of bringing forward schemes of colonial development involving large orders in the United Kingdom continued, and in March 1924 the colonies were asked to furnish details of general utility works which might be started.17 Once again, railway works—to the value of £710,000 in Tanganyika and £1 million to £1.2 million in Nyasaland—were put forward: again a loan free of interest ‘for a considerable period’ was regarded as essential. In addition, the construction of a bridge over the Zambesi (estimated to cost £500,000) was put forward as a possible project.

These proposals remained in abeyance while the East Africa Commission was sitting. In October 1924 the Labour government was defeated in the general election. In the following year there was another call for a substantial loan for Crown colony development, somewhat similar to that of Amery’s of October 1922, this time from the President of the Board of Trade, Sir Philip Cunliffe-Lister:

We should speed up, as much as possible, railway construction and other development in the Empire, particularly in Africa. I am convinced that nationally the most remunerative expenditure we can incur is in the development of markets which will be complementary and not competitive. Africa fulfils this condition to a peculiar degree, and is at the same time the great potential supply of raw cotton.18

The report of the East Africa Commission, was published in May 1925. It concluded that the further economic development of both native and nonnative production in East Africa was dependent upon increased transport facilities, in particular new railways. However, the report continued, ‘The outstanding problem is the finance of such undertakings. It is clear to us that, unless the Imperial Government is prepared to assist liberally in this matter, little or nothing can be done’.19 Accordingly, the commission recommended the introduction of an East Africa Transport Loan Bill to provide a guaranteed loan of £10 million to be used for transport development in East Africa, with the proviso that the loan should be interest free for the first five years. The commission felt that the burden which this placed on the British taxpayer could be justified on the grounds of the moral obligation Britain had to develop her possessions; but also ‘we maintain that the indirect benefits of increased trade and production within the Empire will more than counterbalance any initial sacrifice’. Approximately half of the sum advanced would be spent in the United Kingdom, much of it on railway and engineering equipment. One of the commission’s members suggested the establishment of a ‘National or Imperial Development Board’, into which a fixed sum would be paid annually and from which schemes of imperial development would be financed. These schemes would be submitted by the Colonial Office. The board would advance money to colonial government, public utility companies, etc. as loans, at low rates of interest or free of interest for a number of years.20

The commission’s recommendations were strongly supported by cotton, iron and steel and engineering lobby groups in Britain.21 In October it was discussed in Cabinet. Amery argued that the Central and East African colonies were among the safest and most profitable areas for investment in the empire, for ‘their development lies entirely in the field of the production of raw materials, notably cotton, which are urgently needed by British manufacturers, while every pound of tropical produce grown in these territories increases the purchasing power of their inhabitants for British manufactured goods in return’.22

Cabinet agreed to a £10 million guaranteed loan for East African and a £4.5 million one for Palestine, but did not agree to the suggestion that the loan should be interest free for five years.23 Amery wrote in a memorandum in March 1926: ‘I think we are all agreed that such a course would not be justifiable, and that were this to be provided for in the Bill to be laid before Parliament it would be difficult to get it accepted by the House of Commons.’24 Presumably the reasoning behind this decision was that unemployment in 1926 was not such a serious issue as in 1924 because the levels were lower and the government had no need to face the electorate for another three years. The Bill became law on 15 December 1926 as the Palestine and East Africa Guaranteed Loan Act.

From 1921, then, the continuing crisis of high unemployment levels in Britain stimulated interest in schemes for colonial economic development, particularly railway construction in tropical Africa. This, it was soon discovered, could not be provided by private enterprise, and required grants of interest during the construction period, as happened in the case of the Kenya-Uganda railway loan of 1924. Finally, in 1926, £10 million was provided by Britain for development loans to East Africa, although without provision for periods free of interest, partly as a result of pressure from British manufacturing interests and partly in response to the consequence of the high level of unemployment. By 1926 several proposals for a more comprehensive system of colonial development by means of imperial money paid into a development fund had been suggested, but not yet taken up.

Early in 1929, as a general election approached, Cabinet again turned to colonial economic development as a response to the unemployment crisis.25 Proposals for development of the colonies (among other measures) to help solve the unemployment problem, however, received little encouragement from the Treasury which asserted that the effects of colonial development ‘in stimulating British industry, even assuming that it is not merely a diversion of resources, is less than is often supposed’.26 The expenditure of £10 million over five years on railway development in the colonies, for instance, would increase iron and steel exports by only 1 per cent per annum, and those of rolling stock by 3 per cent. Moreover, the adoption of the proposal that the imperial government should pay the interest on loans raised for colonial development would result in ‘the premature adoption of uneconomic schemes’ which would only make matters worse.

In March Amery returned to the idea of a ‘permanent Empire development policy’ to be implemented by establishing an annual fund of £ 1 million, administered by a board of technical advisers, from which interest in whole or part could be paid on loans for colonial development. The Treasury reiterated its view: ‘Attempts to accelerate colonial development by easy borrowing terms are apt to lead to wasteful and illadvised expenditure’, and ‘orders immediately placed in this country for materials are often disappointingly small’.27

On 10 April 1929 Amery submitted another memorandum to the Cabinet on ‘Colonial Development in relation to the problem of unemployment’. He felt that colonial development so far had been unbalanced: ‘We have asked too much of the colonies and have offered too little ourselves for what is, after all, our problem, and unless we change these lines we shall continue to arrive at the same negative results when the Colonies are asked to do more than they are already doing.’28 He proposed, therefore, a Colonial Development Fund of between £750,000 and £1,000,000 per annum, from which interest charges on loans for development projects involving orders in Britain could be met for a number of years. Schemes similar to those undertaken with the help of the East

Africa Guaranteed Loan were envisaged, but it was now recognised that the rejection of the East Africa Commission’s proposal that loans should be interest free for five years ‘has made it impossible to proceed with any longterm development projects under this Act’. Only £3.5 million of the £10 million provided had been lent.29

These proposals were agreed to by Cabinet and on 30 April Amery announced to the Commons that a Colonial Development Fund would be set up to provide imperial assistance for colonial development.30

The Conservatives lost the election and a new Labour government took office at the beginning of July. Treasury warned against expecting too much from the Colonial Development Bill:

It is not of course to be expected that employment at home will be immediately and directly affected by the Bill to a very large extent, though schemes for construction in the Colonies bring orders here. The Bill is primarily based on a far-sighted policy of Imperial development as one of the surest foundations of prosperity at home; the full fruits of this policy will be increasingly reaped in the years to come.31

The Bill was presented both as a method of promoting colonial economic development and of relieving unemployment in Britain. Its urgency was stressed by the parliamentary under-secretary of state:

I hope that the House will agree to this Bill and that we shall not be delayed too long, as we are anxious to see the schemes of development begun and useful work provided for many of our people as we believe it will be—useful work for those who are unemployed or partially employed today.32

The Bill became law at the end of July 1929.

It seems clear that the proposal in 1929 for a Colonial Development Fund arose out of persistently high levels of unemployment combined with the need to fight a general election. As Amery himself pointed out, another measure like the East Africa Guaranteed Loan Act was not going to work, and a more comprehensive approach was required. The essential idea, however, was not a new one and had been put forward on a number of occasions since Amery’s original proposal for an ‘Empire Development Bill’ in 1922. As an unemployment measure, it may be doubted whether the Colonial Development Act would have helped reduce unemployment even if the early 1929 position had persisted. As it was, as the world depression of 1930–3 deepened, the Act quickly became irrelevant to the problem of reducing Britain’s unemployment.33

In May 1930, with unemployment standing officially at 1,750,000 persons, the Cabinet Committee on Unemployment Policy reported to the Cabinet ‘the broad and undisputed fact that so far the schemes we have sanctioned do not appear to have made any substantial impression upon the volume of employment’. It was estimated that by 28 February 1930, the Colonial Development Advisory Committee (see Chapter 8) had approved schemes the expenditure on which would provide employment for only 8,000 workers. By the beginning of 1931, according to Skidelsky, 13,000 men were being employed directly through the Colonial Development Act, at which date 2,671,000 were without work.34

In March 1931, the National Committee on Expenditure, found that the ‘element of benefit to the trade and industry of this country which is an essential condition of advances under the [Colonial Development] Act, is somewhat remote’.35 It felt that Britain could afford neither to subsidise local colonial governments nor to finance ‘a policy of development which will bring no appreciable benefit to this country for a long time ahead’. Consequently they recommended that only £750,000 per annum should be spent in future, and greater regard given to the effects of advances from the Fund in the United Kingdom.36

Measures introduced to promote colonial economic development in the 1920s were characterised by their ad hoc and expedient nature. Despite a realisation and acknowledgement that the process of colonial economic development was inevitably a long-term one, the measures were brought in hastily and often in immediate reaction to changes in the level of British unemployment. Moreover, the size and effectiveness of these measures were undermined by the preponderance of the Treasury view’ which was at best sceptical of the benefits to Britain of expenditure on capital works in the tropical colonies and which ensured that the amount of money actually provided remained very small and not on easy terms. The inappropriate nature of the kind of assistance being proffered was emphasised by the fact that the sums actually spent fell far short of the amounts (themselves small) nominally provided: offers of financial assistance which consisted, for the most part, of loans on more or less commercial terms, were not ones the colonial governments, or their advisers in the Colonial Office, could readily take up. As we shall see in Chapter 8, by the end of the 1920s many of Britain’s tropical colonies were over-burdened with external debt; if they had added to this burden by accepting further loans under the various schemes of colonial assistance which were suggested (though not all were enacted) their vulnerability by 1930 would have been even more serious.

## IMPERIAL PREFERENCE AND THE EMPIRE MARKETING BOARD

Prior to 1929 the actual amounts of money spent by the British government for developing the ‘great estate’ were insignificant and provided in an unsystematic manner. There were other—equally ad hoc— initiatives resulting from the post-war economic crisis: the reorganisation of the Imperial Institute, the establishment of the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation, the establishment of the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture and the Empire Settlement Act 1922.37 Tariff reform and Imperial preference—the concomitant to economic development in the Joseph Chamberlain programme—was also given emphasis by the economic consequences of the First World War. As seen in Chapter 6, the 1917 Imperial War Conference endorsed preference in principle, but it became clear that taxes on imported foodstuffs and raw materials were not politically possible, and all the British government promised, in 1918, was that ‘a preference will be given to our colonies on existing duties and upon any duties which for our purposes may be subsequently imposed’.38 Imperial preference on existing import duties came into force in September 1919. In most cases imports originating in the empire paid two-thirds or five-sixths of the full import duty and covered tea, cocoa, coffee, chicory, currants, dried and preserved fruits, sugar, glucose, molasses, saccharin, motor spirit, tobacco, articles included under the Safeguarding of Industries Act 1916, wine, beer and spirits.39

At the Imperial Economic Conference in October 1923 the British delegation promised to give greater preference to certain imports which were already taxed and to extend tariffs to several new commodities.40 They also agreed to establish an Imperial Economic Committee on a permanent basis to advise empire governments on economic and commercial matters.41 Sir Philip Lloyd-Graeme, chairman of the conference and President of the Board of Trade, concluded ‘We have all been saying here: we have got this great undeveloped Estate; and the whole job of this Conference is to push on with its development.’42

At the end of October Stanley Baldwin announced that the government could not fight unemployment effectively without a general policy of protection. However, he was careful to make it clear there would be no tax on wheat, flour, meat, bacon, cheese, butter or eggs, so the degree of imperial preference involved was small. The Conservative government was defeated in the December general election, and the new Labour government declined to implement the promises of wider and higher preference made at the Imperial Economic Conference or set up an Imperial Economic Committee.43

The Labour government fell in September 1924 and the Conservatives—Baldwin having renounced protection in June—won the ensuing election. The new Conservative government reversed Labour’s decision on establishing a permanent Imperial Economic Committee (IEC), though the terms of reference were narrowed: instead of being empowered to give advice on all economic and commercial matters affecting the empire, the IEC was

To consider the possibility of improving the methods of preparing for market and marketing within the United Kingdom the food products of the overseas parts of the Empire with a view to increasing the consumption of such products in the United Kingdom in preference to imports from foreign countries and to promote the interests both of producers and consumers.44

As regards the extension of tariffs and imperial preference, the government accepted that it had no mandate to tax foodstuffs and that a ‘complete system of Preference’ was therefore impossible. The government decided to compensate the empire for the tariff changes promised in 1923, and now not to be implemented, by a grant of £1 million per annum, which was the estimated value to the overseas empire of the lost preferences. This grant was to be spent by the IEC in ‘finding entirely new and untried ways of developing trade with the Empire, trade which will bring in Empire stuff in lieu of foreign stuff.45

In 1925 the IEC recommended that the grant of £1 million per annum should be spent by an ‘Executive Commission’ which would undertake a ‘National Movement’ to increase empire buying by the British public. There should be

continuous publicity on a national scale with a view to spreading and fostering [the idea] that Empire purchasing creates an increased demand for the manufactured products of the United Kingdom and therefore stimulates employment at home.46

The executive commission to carry out this task was established in May 1926 as the Empire Marketing Board (EMB).

In the course of its seven years’ existence the EMB developed four main areas of activity designed to promote the consumption of empire foodstuffs and raw materials in the United Kingdom: research, market intelligence, economic investigations and publicity.47 It was discovered at the outset that one of the reasons why some empire produce could not compete with foreign produce on the United Kingdom market was that the empire goods were of an inferior quality in relation to price. The EMB concluded that there was no point in trying to use advertising to persuade the British consumer to buy inferior empire articles, and decided to use approximately half of its grant to support research projects in the United Kingdom and the overseas empire which were designed to raise the standard of empire primary exports.48 The EMB did not initiate research but simply responded to applications for financial assistance from various research establishments and government departments. This resulted in it supporting a varied collection of projects with no provision for coordination between them. Moreover, the EMB made commitments to research bodies for a number of years in advance, which tied up its funds and made it difficult to vary funding in the light of changed circumstances.49

The EMB’s market intelligence activity took the form of publishing weekly ‘intelligence notes’ on various empire products sold in Britain such as dairy produce, fresh fruit, dried and canned fruit. These notes contained details of imports and prices and were distributed free to the appropriate trade bodies. Economic investigations were carried out into the production and marketing of the major primary products entering world trade from the overseas empire as well as into general questions such as agricultural research, geophysical surveying and the importance of empire markets for British manufactures. These reports were published either as EMB or IEC publications.

Publicity work was the most controversial part of the EMB’s activities. It took a number of forms: newspaper advertisements, shop window display material, the organisation of ‘Empire Shopping Weeks’, documentary films, leaflets, radio broadcasts, exhibitions, distribution of material to schools in Britain and overseas and to overseas empire newspapers, lecture programmes and tours and posters on specially constructed hoardings.

The results were not convincing: after seven years, during which time hundreds of posters were displayed on some 2,000 hoardings throughout Britain, extensive press advertising undertaken, Empire Shopping Weeks organised by the score, and one million people (many of whom were children in organised school parties) visited the EMB cinema in the Imperial Institute at South Kensington, criticisms of the EMB remained unabated. There were three main areas of concern: first, that the EMB could not show whether, and if so, to what extent, its campaigns had increased empire trade; second, that its posters and press advertisements were ineffective because they were insufficiently aggressive, too subtle and too intellectual; and third, that the British agricultural industry was being adversely affected by the advertising of empire imports.50

As defenders of the EMB pointed out, it was engaged in selling an idea rather than specific commodities. The idea it sold was the Joseph Chamberlain concept of ‘developing the great estate’. That is, that the empire could produce everything Britain needed in the way of foodstuffs and raw materials and that the empire represented Britain’s best market for manufactured goods. Buying empire produce created work at home and opportunities for increased migration to the empire. Unlike the dominions, and to a lesser extent India, the tropical colonies were not expected to develop industries which competed with British imports and so, by the 1920s, these colonies fulfilled the role of ‘complementary economies’ to a greater extent. The task of the EMB, and especially of its poster artists, was to illustrate this economic relationship in picture form. Their attempts indicated that the racial division of labour, inherent in Chamberlain’s programme, was still very much alive.51 In 1932, in the wake of Britain’s decision to abandon free trade and adopt a policy of imperial tariff preference, the EMB was abolished.

## THE ECONOMICS OF TRUSTEESHIP

The measures taken between 1900 and 1929 by the British government represented an attempt to ‘develop the estate’ by the use of public funds in various forms. The loans and grants were intended to benefit the British economy by making the colonies better customers and suppliers. Although they involved the use of public capital, the philosophy was fir mly that of assisting British private enterprise, rather than of supplanting it. However, when looked at from the colonial viewpoint, there were serious problems for the success of this development strategy. These problems were to do with the structure of the colonial economies, the role of expatriate private enterprise and the philosophy of the local British administrators.

References to the wealth of colonial territories, especially in Africa, was often qualified by the word ‘potential’ when reports were being drawn up in the early twentieth century. The circumstances of British colonies, like other underdeveloped societies, was that of extreme poverty. Rising real per capita incomes and living standards through sustained economic growth might be attainable but colonial economic development required large amounts of investment in social overhead capital as well as in productive enterprise. In most cases sufficient capital was not available on terms the colonies could afford. Moreover, structural changes in the colonial economy leading towards the growth of the domestic sector were essential if the earnings generated by the export sector were to flow on to the benefit of the colony as a whole. Increased production of goods and services for the domestic market might be expected to lead to a more diversified and stronger economy but usually required measures by government designed to facilitate and encourage the growth of the indigenous investor and business community. Colonial rule was not a form of government which could easily accomplish this. An overwhelming emphasis on exports, on the other hand, could lead to unbalanced development, with disastrous consequences if the world’s demand for such exports declined and with the added problem of a drain of export earnings to foreign investors. The colonies were not only poor but caught in a relationship of dependence with the industrialised countries who bought their exports. They exported only primary produce, almost always in an unprocessed state. As demand for their exports grew, and as the colonial government and expatriate private enterprise developed export production, so dependence on one or several products increased. Almost without exception, British colonies became more dependent on a narrower range of export commodities between the wars and in most cases secondary industry based on processing did not develop. The colonies were therefore in no stronger a position to withstand the contraction of the international economy in the 1930s than they had been at the beginning of the 1920s. Indeed, to the extent that their economies were more integrated with the world economy by the end of the decade, they were in a more vulnerable position.

Many British tropical colonies were in a highly vulnerable position because of their extreme reliance on export cash crops and minerals. Table 7.2 shows the way in which the external trade of the tropical colonies virtually stagnated in the second half of the 1920s. Insofar as the trade balance indicates the direction of capital flows, the large export surpluses earned in some territories suggests that they may have experienced a net capital outflow. Yet physical production continued to rise, as illustrated by Table 7.3. With certain exceptions, the export drive inherent in the philosophy of ‘developing the estate’ resulted in dramatic increases in the volume of commodities entering world markets from Britain’s tropical colonies between 1912–14 and 1927–9, from both plantation and peasant modes of production.52 This occurred despite falling or weak commodity prices following the end of the 1919–20 boom. Table 7.4 indicates the extent of the price decline in the early 1920s, followed by patchy recovery in the middle years and further falls in 1929. Import prices fell also so that the terms of trade rose in most cases from 1922, following their collapse in 1921, to a peak around 1926 or 1927. Thereafter the terms of trade were static or falling prior to the major decline caused by the onset of the Great Depression. Public works expenditure to support the export sector had led to very high levels of external debt, shown in Table 7.5, the servicing of which was becoming an increasing burden for the colonial economies by the beginning of the 1930s.

The failure of the British development measures to work was partly due to the role played by expatriate private enterprise. Their investments extended to mining, agricultural production, and trading, but with a few notable exceptions—of which rubber in Malaya was one—interest concentrated on the first and third of these areas. Mining ventures could usually attract British capital, though direct and indirect government assistance was also a factor.53 Foreign trading enterprises were often the oldest form of commercial contact between the colonial people and Europe, and they continued to dominate the import and export trades. In both trades profits were expatriated and local enterprise discouraged or ignored. Agricultural ventures were less popular. Even in the rubber industry in Malaya expatriate enterprise found itself in difficulties after 1921 and had to be assisted by the British government for much of the inter-war period.54 This produced a situation where—except for mining— capital was in short supply in Britain’s colonies, and inevitably this placed a brake on the speed at which growth could take place. Poverty and a narrow export base made local capital accumulation difficult.

orts, exports and balance of trade, selected colonies, 19
<table><tr><td>Colonies</td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>42574 13847</td><td>20914 6587</td><td>21005 6979</td><td>22808</td><td>20458</td><td>26155</td><td>23476 13640</td><td>28879</td><td>29858</td><td>25106</td><td>22987</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa Central</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>8717</td><td>11214</td><td>14408</td><td></td><td>14025</td><td>15499</td><td>15610</td><td>13380</td></tr><tr><td>Africa</td><td>1173</td><td>1372</td><td>1020</td><td>1015</td><td>1233</td><td>1914</td><td>2509</td><td>2952</td><td>3304</td><td>4398</td><td>5717</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>165460</td><td>84958</td><td>77005</td><td>91743</td><td>105337</td><td>144830</td><td>152060</td><td>151861</td><td>135100</td><td>137362</td><td>109102</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>29794</td><td>18877</td><td>14851</td><td>15819</td><td>15447</td><td>16103</td><td>15769</td><td>16741</td><td>17349</td><td>18248</td><td>16143</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>1652</td><td>1484</td><td>843</td><td>988</td><td>1066</td><td>1263</td><td>1464</td><td>1215</td><td>1455</td><td>1454</td><td>1219</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>254500</td><td>134192</td><td>121803</td><td>141090</td><td>154755</td><td>204673</td><td>208918</td><td>215673</td><td>202565</td><td>202378</td><td>168548</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>33795</td><td>15852</td><td>17801</td><td>20908</td><td>25646</td><td>29156</td><td>30215</td><td>31774</td><td>32945</td><td>31653</td><td>26034</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>9761</td><td>5931</td><td>6874</td><td>9032</td><td>12175</td><td>14375</td><td>12425</td><td>12017</td><td>14012</td><td>14471</td><td>11101</td></tr><tr><td>Central</td><td>1205</td><td>976</td><td>1031</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Africa Eastern</td><td>143027</td><td>83789</td><td>82991</td><td>882 106451</td><td>1031 117187</td><td>991</td><td>1153</td><td>1715</td><td>1552</td><td>1522</td><td>1550 101945</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbcan</td><td>25890</td><td>12804</td><td>12755</td><td>15409</td><td>13705</td><td>190175 11101</td><td>188484 14256</td><td>162285 16219</td><td>131972 15716</td><td>141728</td><td>13381</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>2876</td><td>2538</td><td>1843</td><td>1550</td><td>1491</td><td>2147</td><td>1696</td><td>1980</td><td>2692</td><td>15824 1708</td><td>1452</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>216554</td><td>121890</td><td>12395</td><td>154232</td><td>171235</td><td>247945</td><td>248229</td><td>225990</td><td>198889</td><td>206906</td><td>155463</td></tr><tr><td>Balance</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>-8779</td><td>5062</td><td>3204</td><td>-1900</td><td>5188</td><td>3001</td><td>6739</td><td>2895</td><td>3087</td><td>6547</td><td>3017</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>-4086</td><td>656</td><td>-105</td><td>315</td><td>961</td><td>33</td><td>-1215</td><td>-2008</td><td>-1487</td><td>-1139</td><td>-2279</td></tr><tr><td>Central</td><td></td><td>-396</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Africa</td><td>32 -22433</td><td>-1169</td><td>11</td><td>-133</td><td>202</td><td>-923</td><td>-1356</td><td>-1237</td><td>--1752</td><td>-2876</td><td>4167</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>-3904</td><td>-6073</td><td>5986 -2096</td><td>14708</td><td>11850</td><td>45345</td><td>36424</td><td>10424</td><td>-3128</td><td>4166</td><td>-7157</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>1224</td><td>1054</td><td></td><td>--410</td><td>-742</td><td>-5002</td><td>-1513</td><td>−522</td><td>-1633</td><td>2424</td><td>2762</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td></td><td></td><td>900</td><td>562</td><td>425</td><td>884</td><td>232</td><td>765</td><td>1237</td><td>254</td><td>233</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>-37946</td><td>12302</td><td>1492</td><td>13142</td><td>16480</td><td>43272</td><td>29311</td><td>10317</td><td>3676</td><td>4528</td><td>-13085</td></tr></table>

Table 7.3 Selected commodity exports, annual averages, 1912–14 to 1937–9
<table><tr><td>Commodity</td><td>Colony</td><td>1912-14</td><td>1917-19</td><td>1922-4</td><td>19279</td><td>19324</td><td>19379</td></tr><tr><td>Cocoa</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>456</td><td>564</td><td>520</td><td>512</td><td>357</td><td>254</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">cwt,000</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>947</td><td>2223</td><td>3869</td><td>4487</td><td>4667</td><td>5203</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>80</td><td>343</td><td>675</td><td>957</td><td>1399</td><td>2094</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>76</td><td>72</td><td>64</td><td>73</td><td>77</td><td>76</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Coffee cwt,000 Sugar cwt,000</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>22f</td><td>107</td><td>171</td><td>226</td><td>354</td><td>612</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>4486</td><td>4144</td><td>4586</td><td>4758</td><td>4003</td><td>5908</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>759</td><td>1081</td><td>834</td><td>1316</td><td>1920</td><td>2516</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>1816</td><td>1940</td><td>1731</td><td>2165</td><td>2627</td><td>3628</td></tr><tr><td>Tea lb,mill</td><td>Ccylon</td><td>192</td><td>195</td><td>1866</td><td>238</td><td>229</td><td>226</td></tr><tr><td>Bananas</td><td>Jamaica</td><td>14</td><td>5</td><td>12</td><td>20</td><td>16</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>slems,mill Copra</td><td>Malayaa</td><td>11</td><td>24</td><td>161</td><td>175</td><td>199</td><td>181</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000</td><td>Ceylon</td><td>52</td><td>69</td><td>75</td><td>100</td><td>72</td><td>66</td></tr><tr><td>Palm Kernels</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>174</td><td>203</td><td>218</td><td>252</td><td>286</td><td>317</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000</td><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>45</td><td>50</td><td>57</td><td>64</td><td>70</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td>Palm Oil tons,000</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>76</td><td>87</td><td>105</td><td>124</td><td>119</td><td>127</td></tr><tr><td>Groundnuts</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>13</td><td>19</td><td>42</td><td>114</td><td>213</td><td>218</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000 Rubber</td><td>Malayab</td><td>27</td><td>286</td><td>567</td><td>2425</td><td>1290</td><td>1315</td></tr><tr><td>1b,mill</td><td>Ccylon</td><td>25</td><td>73</td><td>91</td><td>145</td><td>144</td><td>135</td></tr><tr><td>Cotton</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>5161</td><td>4501</td><td>8005</td><td>10894</td><td>8547</td><td>14710</td></tr><tr><td>lb,000</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>11654d</td><td>13041</td><td>38417</td><td>63366</td><td>105937</td><td>148741</td></tr><tr><td>Sisal</td><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>979d</td><td>4771</td><td>9735</td><td>16001</td><td>19750)</td><td>30382</td></tr><tr><td>tons</td><td>Tanganyika</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>13832</td><td>38309</td><td>67555</td><td>95047</td></tr><tr><td>Tobacco</td><td>Nyasaland</td><td>3112</td><td>1058</td><td>6178</td><td>12479</td><td>12673</td><td>13496</td></tr><tr><td>lb,000 Copper</td><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>1426</td><td>991</td><td>256</td><td>5184</td><td>101771</td><td>208329</td></tr><tr><td>tons Bauxite</td><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>85</td><td>171</td><td>51</td><td>384</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000 Manganese</td><td>Gold Coast</td><td>nil</td><td>31</td><td>143</td><td>371</td><td>219</td><td>396</td></tr><tr><td>tons,000. Tin</td><td>Malayab</td><td>64527</td><td>59473</td><td>72268</td><td>94951</td><td>50675</td><td>78794</td></tr><tr><td>tons</td><td>Nigeria</td><td>4391</td><td>8648</td><td>8483</td><td>13042</td><td>6237</td><td>13358</td></tr><tr><td>Petroleum</td><td>Trinidad</td><td>10</td><td>14</td><td>85</td><td>168</td><td>203</td><td>385</td></tr><tr><td>crude, gall, mill</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>

a Federated Malay States only 1912–14 and 1917–19; b Straits Settlements only 1912–14 and 1917–19;c Copper ore, concentrate, bar and ingot 1912–14, 1917–19 and 1922–24; copper ore, concentrate and blister 1932–1934; copper blister and electrolytic, 1937–1939; d 1 Apr. 1912–31 Mar. 1915; e 1 Apr. 1917–31 Mar. 1920; f 1 Apr. 1913–31 Mar. 1915. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, Nos. 57, 58, 63, 68, 69 (1909–45).

erms of trade, selected colonies 1920-30 (19
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td></td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>E</td><td>160.6</td><td>74.7</td><td>76.3</td><td>72.0</td><td>69.7</td><td>79.2</td><td>83.7</td><td>113.2</td><td>102.0</td><td>84.9</td><td>77.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>235.4</td><td>198.3</td><td>123.1</td><td>105.7</td><td>109.2</td><td>111.3</td><td>109.0</td><td>102.0</td><td>101.4</td><td>96.2</td><td>87.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>T</td><td>68</td><td>38</td><td>62</td><td>68</td><td>64</td><td>71</td><td>77</td><td>111</td><td>101</td><td>88</td><td>88</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E</td><td>160.7</td><td>94.6</td><td>88.8</td><td>91.4</td><td>98.4</td><td>102.8</td><td>104.7</td><td>104.4</td><td>102.0</td><td>95.0</td><td>78.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>202.1</td><td>168.4</td><td>118.7</td><td>110.0</td><td>118.1</td><td>117.9</td><td>101.1</td><td>108.0</td><td>107.9</td><td>105.2</td><td>94.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>80</td><td>56</td><td>75</td><td>83</td><td>83</td><td>87</td><td>104</td><td>97</td><td>95</td><td>90</td><td>84</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>E</td><td>241.9</td><td>89.1</td><td>96.4</td><td>105.1</td><td>126.2</td><td>125.6</td><td>99.6</td><td>88.5</td><td>107.2</td><td>104.0</td><td>78.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>249.3</td><td>199.1</td><td>133.7</td><td>118.2</td><td>121.9</td><td>117.7</td><td>112.3</td><td>105.4</td><td>96.8</td><td>99.4</td><td>94.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>97</td><td>45</td><td>72</td><td>89</td><td>104</td><td>107</td><td>89</td><td>84</td><td>111</td><td>105</td><td>83</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>E</td><td>444.9</td><td>292.3</td><td>130.8</td><td>130.8</td><td>117.9</td><td>105.1</td><td>102.6</td><td>115.4</td><td>98.7</td><td>87.2</td><td>65.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>232.6</td><td>127.3</td><td>114.4</td><td>106.6</td><td>105.3</td><td>116.5</td><td>113.3</td><td>102.6</td><td>102.1</td><td>95.4</td><td>83.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>191</td><td>230</td><td>114</td><td>123</td><td>112</td><td>90</td><td>91</td><td>112</td><td>97</td><td>91</td><td>78</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>E</td><td>126.0</td><td>80.4</td><td>86.0</td><td>108.1</td><td>105.3</td><td>145.6</td><td>133.0</td><td>116.5</td><td>88.1</td><td>86.3</td><td>71.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>201.1</td><td>117.8</td><td>106.9</td><td>98.6</td><td>93.6</td><td>105.8</td><td>103.3</td><td>102.7</td><td>99.2</td><td>97.4</td><td>80.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>63</td><td>68</td><td>80</td><td>110</td><td>113</td><td>138</td><td>129</td><td>113</td><td>89</td><td>89</td><td>89</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>E</td><td>192.2</td><td>84.6</td><td>77.4</td><td>121.6</td><td>119.7</td><td>232.0</td><td>189.1</td><td>155.4</td><td>99.2</td><td>45.9</td><td>58.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>243.7</td><td>95.7</td><td>158.7</td><td>169.3</td><td>106.6</td><td>112.5</td><td>116.0</td><td>105.7</td><td>96.8</td><td>96.6</td><td>92.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>T</td><td>79</td><td>88</td><td>49</td><td>72</td><td>112</td><td>206</td><td>163</td><td>147</td><td>103</td><td>48</td><td>63</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E</td><td>206.5</td><td>107.4</td><td>110.0</td><td></td><td>99.4</td><td>93.5</td><td>97.5</td><td>101.9</td><td>97.8</td><td>101.0</td><td>80.6</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>[</td><td>266.5</td><td>141.7</td><td></td><td>141.2 111.1</td><td></td><td>116.6</td><td></td><td>102.7</td><td>97.8</td><td>99.0</td><td>92.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I</td><td>77</td><td>76</td><td>103.4</td><td></td><td>120.6</td><td></td><td>110.1</td><td></td><td></td><td>102</td><td>87</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>106</td><td>127</td><td>82</td><td>80</td><td>89</td><td>99</td><td>100</td><td></td><td>79.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E</td><td>168.6</td><td>106.7</td><td>93.1</td><td>97.5</td><td>89.6</td><td>97.6</td><td>97.9</td><td>117.6</td><td>97.6</td><td>84.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I T</td><td>177.6 95</td><td>153.1 70</td><td>112.4 83</td><td>102.5 95</td><td>105.8 85</td><td>114.1 86</td><td>108.8 90</td><td>101.9 115</td><td>100.0 98</td><td>98.3 86</td><td>94.2 85</td></tr></table>

ed index of the unit value of principa d index of the unit value of principal s of trade: E divided by I atistical Abstract for British Empire, No

cal Abstract of the British Empire Nos. 57, 58; Colonial A
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1913</td><td>1919</td><td>1920</td><td>1921</td><td>1922</td><td>1923</td><td>1924</td><td>1925</td><td>1926</td><td>1927</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>0.4</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.2</td><td>5.0</td><td>5.0</td><td>5.0</td><td>8.5</td><td>8.5</td><td>8.5</td><td>10.0</td><td>13.5</td><td>13.5</td><td>16.9</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>0.3</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.9</td><td>0.9</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.1</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>&lt;0.1</td><td>0.8</td><td>1.6</td><td>2.4</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>3.1</td><td>5.2</td><td>5.2</td><td>5.2</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.2</td><td>0.3</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.5</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.7</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.8</td><td>0.9</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>2.5</td><td>3.4</td><td>7.4</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.1</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>13.0</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>8.3</td><td>12.0</td><td>10.3</td><td>13.6</td><td>13.6</td><td>19.3</td><td>19.3</td><td>19.3</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>28.4</td></tr><tr><td> Cceylon.</td><td>6.1</td><td>7.0</td><td>7.0</td><td>10.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>15.9</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.2</td><td>I.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.3</td><td>1.6</td><td>1.7</td><td>1.8</td><td>1.8</td><td>1.9</td><td>1.9</td><td>2.8</td></tr><tr><td>West Indies</td><td>6.4</td><td>6.8</td><td>7.0</td><td>8.0</td><td>8.8</td><td>9.3</td><td>9.3</td><td>9.6</td><td>9.8</td><td>10.0</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.2</td></tr><tr><td>British Guiana</td><td>0.9</td><td>1.2</td><td>1.2</td><td>1.2</td><td>2.4</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.7</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>4.8</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>26.3</td><td>33.4</td><td>35.9</td><td>48.3</td><td>54.3</td><td>61.5</td><td>66.2</td><td>71.3</td><td>76.0</td><td>77.8</td><td>83.7</td><td>86.1</td><td>99.1</td></tr></table>

ublic debt, selected colonies, 1913 and 1919

The slow growth of a capitalist class in most colonies was not, however, simply a result of the economic circumstances. The colonial authorities followed policies which were directly and indirectly inimical to the development of colonial capitalism. In West Africa, for example, a conflict occurred between the metropolitan desire to develop the estate and the local authorities’ deter mination to protect the native from such development. Soon after Joseph Chamberlain’s call to British businessmen to invest in the newly won tropical lands, William Lever was refused permission to establish oil-palm plantations in West Africa. After several attempts, he went elsewhere, to the Congo. Later he was asked to set up oilcrushing mills in Nigeria, since this was considered by the local authorities to be a legitimate role for expatriate enterprise. This time it was Lever’s turn to refuse. The palm oil industry of Nigeria—accounting for up to one half of the colony’s export earnings—stagnated, for the locally owned plantations which were established were negligible.55

The policy of the local colonial governments was not to oppose all forms of economic development. Some African colonial administrations— such as that of Sir Gordon Guggisberg in the Gold Coast in the 1920s— energetically built roads, harbours and railways, borrowing heavily on the London market to do so.56 The export industries of Malaya were excellently served with infrastructure by the government. But where development seemed to lead away from a peasant-based society, local officials were far more cautious. Traditional ways of life were to be preserved as part of the policy of trusteeship. In West Africa natives were not to be allowed to drift to towns or work on European plantations and become wage-workers. In Malaya there was a racial segmentation of the economy, and the role assigned to the Malays was that of subsistence rice farmers who should remain in their villages.57 Only in colonies where there were white settlers, as in East and Central Africa, was widespread rural wage employment for natives considered desirable, indeed essential, to provide the settlers with a labour force, but they were often discouraged from competing with the settlers in producing cash crops for export themselves, with varying degrees of success.58 The image of the native which colonial administrators held was sometimes highly romantic, seeing them as ‘sturdy peasants’ of the kind long-disappeared in England, who were too backward to cope with modern capitalism.59 Even where a vigorous export industry, such as cocoa in the Gold Coast, was in native hands, officials persisted in regarding the cocoa farmer as basically a subsistence peasant who grew cocoa as a cash crop sideline, who lacked the long-term perspective of a capitalist and who was unresponsive to market forces.60 Indigenous capitalism undoubtedly emerged and grew—even flourished from time to time—in some of Britain’s tropical colonies during the inter-war period, but it seemed to do so despite the policies of the colonial regime rather than because of them.61

To this antipathy towards local nascent capitalists was added the hostility of British firms. Trading companies were undercut by local traders and British manufacturers objected to import-substituting industries in the colonies. Even local governments found their railways losing money because of competition from motor transport companies owned by natives.62 There was much opposition locally to the establishment of secondary industry, and in London the protective instincts of Colonial Office officials were encouraged by interested sections of Britain’s trade and industry to produce a strong resistance to secondary industry in the colonial empire, as we shall see in the next chapter.

The twin pillars of British colonial economic policy were reinforced during the 1920s. Private enterprise remained predominantly British and the rise of native capitalism was resisted. The colonial economies remained complementary to the British economy, providing foodstuffs, raw materials and absorbing manufactured goods. The degree of dependence on a narrow range of primary exports increased in most cases, and tendencies towards the colonial economies becoming less complementary were successfully resisted. The general economic experience of colonies under British rule from 1900 to 1929 was one of bursts of growth in the export sector, but not development towards the creation of a strong diversified economy which might be regarded as a more appropriate fulfilment of ‘trusteeship’.

## Depression and disillusion The colonial economies in the 1930s

## THE WORK OF THE COLONIAL DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE1

As a result of the 1929 Colonial Development Act, British colonial aid was intended to be more systematic in the 1930s. In August 1929, the Colonial Development Advisory Committee (CDAC), established under the Act to administer the Colonial Development Fund, determined the procedure to be followed for applications for assistance. It decided that a colonial government must first submit the project to the Colonial Office which would then either pass it on to the committee (with or without a recommendation that it be assisted), or return it to the colony for revision. If revised and resubmitted by the colony, the Colonial Office would pass the scheme to the CDAC, though an application without the secretary of state’s recommendation stood little chance of success. From January 1930 the financial adviser to the secretary of state, Sir John Campbell, attended the CDAC meetings and presented the Colonial Office view. If the governor, or another senior official of the colony making the application was in London at the time it came before the committee, he generally appeared and explained the case, but there was no formal provision for a direct submission from the colony to the committee and the CDAC had no power to initiate schemes itself.

The number of applications, the cost of schemes accepted for assistance, the amounts of assistance recommended by the CDAC and the actual amounts paid out of the fund in each of the financial years of the committee’s operations between 1929 and 1939 are shown in Table 8.1. Between 1929 and 1939 the committee received 822 applications and accepted 641 of them (78 per cent) as suitable for assistance. Of these, 24 were later abandoned and so 617 schemes assisted by the committee were actually completed or were still in operation by 31 March 1939. The total cost of these 617 was £17,287,000 and the CDAC recommended a total of £7,910,000 to assist them. That is, it found on average 45.8 per cent of the cost of each scheme, though such an average does not mean very much with so varied a group of projects. The remainder had to be found by the colonial governments themselves from public loans or surplus revenue. Assistance took three forms: a free capital grant, a loan (generally interest free for three to five years) and a free grant of interest on a loan raised elsewhere. Free capital grants accounted for 48.3 per cent of all assistance, or, if free grants of interest are included (as is shown in Table 8.1), 61 per cent, and thus were more important than loans. The actual amounts paid out from the Colonial Development Fund fell short of the committee’s recommendations as schemes required the money gradually and some were still in operation in 1939, though in three years the amount paid out exceeded the amount recommended. Overall, by 1939, £6,378,000 had been spent in the colonial empire under the Act, 57.1 per cent of it in the form of grants.

in each period except for 1929–30 1 August to 28 February) and 1930–31 1 Marc (( lonial Development Advisory Committee, Nos. 1 to 10; Abstract accounts of the Colonial Developme  
tance from the Colonial Development Advisory Commi
<table><tr><td>Perioda</td><td>No. of appli- cations</td><td>No. of applic- ations accepted</td><td>No. accepted excluding those later abandoned</td><td>Cost of Schemes in col. 3 (£)</td><td>way of grant to schemes shown in col. 3 (£)</td><td>Assistance by Assistance by way of loan to schemes shown in col. 3 (£)</td><td>Total assistance recom- mended (£)</td><td>Actual grants paid out (£000)</td><td>Actual loans paid out (£000)</td><td>Total assistance actually paid out</td></tr><tr><td>192930</td><td>62</td><td>50</td><td>46</td><td>5379327</td><td>756580</td><td>580200</td><td>1336780</td><td>222.3</td><td>119.5</td><td>(£000) 341.8</td></tr><tr><td>1930-31</td><td>177</td><td>118</td><td>110</td><td>2996683</td><td>856766</td><td>329119</td><td>1185885</td><td>407.5</td><td>438.8</td><td>846.3</td></tr><tr><td>193132</td><td>86</td><td>48</td><td>43</td><td>423796</td><td>205466</td><td>15225</td><td>220691</td><td>400.1</td><td>207.8</td><td>607.9</td></tr><tr><td>193233</td><td>48</td><td>38</td><td>38</td><td>347763</td><td>144911</td><td>118444</td><td>263355</td><td>257.9</td><td>113.4</td><td>371.3</td></tr><tr><td>193334</td><td>55</td><td>43</td><td>40</td><td>2136631</td><td>421669</td><td>320732</td><td>733401</td><td>299.0</td><td>506.9</td><td>805.9</td></tr><tr><td>1934-35</td><td>96</td><td>83</td><td>82</td><td>1691133</td><td>435214</td><td>649187</td><td>1084401</td><td>409.9</td><td>329.9</td><td>739.8</td></tr><tr><td>193536</td><td>91</td><td>75</td><td>73</td><td>1016245</td><td>447778</td><td>421066</td><td>868844</td><td>321.2</td><td>365.4</td><td>686.6</td></tr><tr><td>193637</td><td>69</td><td>60 55</td><td>60</td><td>1258668</td><td>505987</td><td>304058 288317</td><td>810045</td><td>430.6</td><td>269.0</td><td>699.6</td></tr><tr><td>193738</td><td>61 77</td><td>71</td><td>54 71</td><td>930475 1178052</td><td>492571 565973</td><td>59905</td><td>780888 625878</td><td>478.6 415.2</td><td>256.0 129.5</td><td>734.6</td></tr><tr><td>1938-39</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>544.7</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>822</td><td>641</td><td>617</td><td>17286773</td><td>4823915</td><td>3086253</td><td>7910168</td><td>3642.4</td><td>2736.1</td><td>6378.5</td></tr></table>

The number of applications submitted was fairly low during the first seven months (sixty-two) but then increased to an average of 13.6 per month in the thirteen months March 1930 to March 1931. Thereafter the number fluctuated between four per month in 1932–3 and eight in 1934–5. Once the initial backlog of schemes which had been previously shelved for lack of funds had been submitted the number of applications tended to fall gradually. More than three-quarters of the applications were successful in obtaining some funds (though sometimes less than the amount asked for) and the ‘success rate’ was somewhat higher from 1934 onwards, reaching 92 per cent in 1938–9. The committee went through a more strict phase, from 1930 to 1932, when, largely under pressure from the Treasury, schemes which appeared not to have any immediate benefit to the colony or the United Kingdom, or were on the borderline between what was seen as ‘economic development’ and ‘social development’ were regarded less favourably. From 1933 there was a steady relaxation in the CDAC’s attitude. Twenty-four schemes were abandoned—3.8 per cent of the total assisted— usually because the local government could not afford to pay its share of the cost.

The most expensive scheme, the Zambesi Bridge project in Nyasaland cost $\mathcal { L } 3$ million; the cheapest was for the visit of a medical expert to Barbados costing $\mathcal { L } 7 8$ . With such a wide range, calculating the ‘average cost’ is not a very useful exercise. However, only thirteen schemes cost more than £200,000 and relatively low-cost schemes predominated. In fact, few large-scale schemes were submitted to the committee after 1931, the only major exception being one for a deepwater harbour at Por t of Spain, Trinidad, to cost $\mathcal { L } 1$ m i l l i o n , recommended for assistance in 1933.

Briefly then, the majority of applications were successful, relatively few were abandoned and grants were rather more important than loans. Perhaps the most striking aspect was that most activity was in the early years: 30 per cent of all applications were received before 1931 and schemes recommended for assistance by March 1931 cost £8.4 million— slightly under half the total for the whole period. After this initial burst of enthusiasm, applications tended to fall, and from 1931 applications never exceeded eight per month, compared to an average of twelve per month up to March 1931.

The kind of schemes assisted were not the large-scale schemes of transportation and communications which the designers of the Act had envisaged; indeed, most were not large-scale schemes at all. According to J.H.Thomas, the typical project which he had in mind when introducing the money resolution for the Bill, was the construction of Takoradi harbour in the Gold Coast, which had cost about £3.5 million. He also mentioned the Zambesi Bridge project—estimated to cost £3 million—as a suitable object.2 In fact, very few large-scale projects were undertaken with money from the fund.

The kind of development which was seen as necessary in the 1930s was not the high-cost transport and communications schemes of the 1900–30 period. In the depressed trade conditions of the 1930s there seemed to be little scope for further large-scale transportation projects. Rather colonial governments focussed their attention on smaller-scale projects, for example, for urban water supply, housing, provision of electrical light and power, public health and sanitation and secondary roads.

The Colonial Development Act set out thirteen categories of scheme, shown in Table 8.2. The two most important categories were ‘internal transport and communications’ and ‘public health’. Over the period 1929–40 these two accounted for 30 and 16 per cent of the assistance respectively. The most neglected categories were fisheries, forestry and electricity; the first two of these indicated a failure to develop the natural resources of the tropical colonial empire with money from the fund (as did the fairly low proportion given to mineral development), and the last the dislike of the committee for schemes which they regarded as not particularly developmental. More importantly, agricultural development schemes accounted for only 13 per cent of the total number and 5 per cent of the assistance, a remarkable fact when it is remembered to what extent all colonies relied on the production and export of agricultural produce, and that the need for a greater degree of export diversification in most colonies was an important problem in the 1930s. Since the committee did not initiate schemes, the lack of attention to agriculture, fishery and forestry schemes was an indication of the attitude of the local governments towards developing these resources.

Well over half of the transport and communication schemes were for roads and bridges and this category also accounted for over half the assistance given to transport and communications. All but one of the railway schemes were submitted before April 1931, whereas only fifteen schemes for roads and bridges were submitted before that date. Moreover, few of the railway schemes involved the construction of new line, but were rather for the relaying and realignment of existing track, much of which had seemingly been poorly built. Railway schemes were also more geographically concentrated than road schemes: eight of the eleven railway schemes were in African colonies south of the Sahara. Clearly, new developments in transport in the 1930s involved road and air rather than railways. These projects were much less costly than the railway schemes: the eleven air transport schemes cost on average £41,527 each (though they ranged from £118,000 to £342), the seventy-one road schemes, £32,745 (with a range of $\mathcal { L } 3 0 0 { , } 0 0 0$ to £550), whilst eleven railway schemes cost on average £431,365 (ranging from $\mathcal { L } 3$ million to £6,000). Thus there is little doubt that as far as transport schemes financed by the CD AC were concerned, the pattern in the 1930s was for colonies to favour cheaper projects, usually for road transport, filling-in some of the gaps left by the earlier railway development and acting as ‘feeders’ for the railways. This minor transport revolution was, of course, closely linked to the growth of motor traffic in the colonial empire in the inter-war period.

Table 8.2 Types of development schemes assisted by the Colonial Development Act, 1929–39
<table><tr><td>Category</td><td>No. of schemes assisted</td><td>%</td><td>Assistance granted (£000)</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Agriculture &amp;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>veterinary</td><td>85</td><td>13.3</td><td>387.6</td><td>4.9</td></tr><tr><td>Fisheries</td><td>8</td><td>1.2</td><td>166.1</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Forestry</td><td>15</td><td>2.3</td><td>79.1</td><td>1.0</td></tr><tr><td>Land reclamation, drainage and</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>irrigation Transport &amp;</td><td>21</td><td>3.3</td><td>356.0</td><td>4.5</td></tr><tr><td>communications</td><td>118</td><td>18.4</td><td>2626.2</td><td>33.2</td></tr><tr><td>Harbours</td><td>17</td><td>2.7</td><td>450.9</td><td>5.7</td></tr><tr><td>Medical &amp; public health</td><td>114</td><td>17.8</td><td>1036.2</td><td>13.1</td></tr><tr><td>Water supply &amp; sanitation</td><td>69</td><td>10.8</td><td>893.9</td><td>11.3</td></tr><tr><td>Electricity supply</td><td>5</td><td>0.8</td><td>63.3</td><td>0.8</td></tr><tr><td>Mineral resources</td><td>3</td><td>0.5</td><td>704.0</td><td>8.9</td></tr><tr><td>Geological surveys</td><td>32</td><td>5.0</td><td>245.2</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>Research</td><td>115</td><td>17.9</td><td>553.7</td><td>7.0</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td><td>39</td><td>6.0</td><td>348.0</td><td>4.4</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>641</td><td>100.0</td><td>7910.2</td><td>100.0</td></tr></table>

Source: Reports of the CDAC, 1929–39.

As the 1930s progressed, transport and communications schemes tended to become relatively less important and public health ones relatively more important. In 1929–30, 33 per cent of assistance went to transport and communications, while public health received only 7 per cent, and in 1933–4 the proportions were 10 and 7 per cent respectively. However, by 1936–37 transport and communications accounted for 3 per cent while public health received 25 per cent; and in 1937–38 the proportion of assistance given to public health again exceeded that granted to transport and communications schemes. In the last year of the committee’s operation, 1939–40, public health received over 40 per cent of the total assistance.

The CDAC’s policy towards public health and medical schemes illustrated very well attitudes current in the 1930s towards financing economic development. On the one hand, there was an older school of thought which stressed the need to spend money on infrastructure and ‘practical research’ —i.e., research which yielded useful results quickly. On the other hand, there was evidence of a growing feeling that the problems of the low standard of living in the colonies and their inability to increase prosperity (indeed the very opposite in many cases) was not going to be cured merely by more roads, railways, harbours, etc., but by tackling the ‘social problems’ of bad housing, disease, high infant mortality rates, malnutrition and so forth, more directly. These two views produced a conflict within the committee (and probably within individual committee members) because they were responsible for the expenditure of public money which was supposed to benefit the United Kingdom taxpayers who were providing it, as well as the colonial population. Yet they were aware of growing social problems in the colonies, the severity of which became increasingly clear with the publication of such reports as the Report on Labour Conditions in the West Indies (1938), the Report of the Advisory Council on Nutrition in the Colonial Empire (1939)3 and Lord Hailey’s influential An African Survey (1938). However, even, with such evidence of the appalling living standards in the colonial empire, the committee always had the Treasury looking over its collective shoulder, as well as differing opinions among its members.

It is not surprising, then, that the majority of schemes rejected by the committee because they were ‘not of a development nature’ were public health and medical schemes. The CDAC gave as many as thirty-three different reasons for rejecting schemes over the course of its operations, but in approximately half the cases the reason amounted to the judgement that the project was not developmental. This affected schemes other than public health, of course, but public health ones were the most vulnerable, and their ‘success rate’ was less than average—67.5 per cent compared with 78.0 per cent for all applications.

In 1930 the committee expressed a willingness to devote 10 per cent of the fund to public health schemes each year, and in a circular letter to the colonies the secretary of state wrote:

It may not…be so widely realised that the Committee are also prepared to give liberal assistance towards schemes of public health and research, which are not the less important because they involve a smaller outlay. You may rest assured that the economic importance of measures to safeguard the health of all classes of the community is fully appreciated in this country. Grants have been made towards works of drainage and water supply, and the erection of hospital buildings and labourers’ dwellings.4

Up to 31 March 1931, 25 per cent of the committee’s assistance was to public health schemes, and between 1 April 1931 and 31 March 1937, 44 per cent.5 This high level was drastically reduced in the next year to 5 per cent of total assistance, and in 1933–4 to 7 per cent. By March 1934, £496,981 had been allocated to assist public health in four and a half years, which was slightly above the target set in 1930 of 10 per cent.6

Increasingly, however, the committee saw medical and health schemes as ‘less developmental’ than others submitted, and from 1934 they hardened their attitude towards them. This was made easier when Sir Alan Rae Smith took over from Sir Basil Blackett as chairman in September 1935.7 Assistance did not dry up completely—aid was given to a tuberculosis hospital and clinic in Jamaica in 1935 and to a tuberculosis sanitarium in Cyprus in 1936, but only because in both cases the Rockefeller Foundation was involved in medical research in the island and the proposed scheme would facilitate this.8 An application from Trinidad for a tuberculosis sanitarium in 1935 was turned down on the grounds that it was a service which should be provided by the government of Trinidad in the normal way. There was no element of international research in Trinidad’s case.9 In 1937 an application from Trans-Jordan for assistance in building a hospital at Amman was rejected on the argument that the hospital would engage in purely curative work rather than ‘the attacking of causes leading to the spread of disease and the effecting of improvements in the health of the community generally’.10

This change of attitude—or more strict interpretation of their policy— was reflected in the proportion of assistance given to public health: 7 per cent in 1933–4, 4 per cent in 1934–5 and 8 per cent in 1935–6. In 1936–7, however, the proportion was 25 per cent and the next year, 31 per cent despite the committee’s attitude on ‘purely curative’ public health schemes, which indicated that health schemes which they did feel able to assist were being submitted in some numbers. In 1938–9 the proportion fell once more, to 10 per cent—the level set by Blackett in 1930.

In the final 16 months of the committee’s existence it seemed to revert to the pre-1934 attitude, for no less than 40 per cent of its assistance went to schemes for the advancement of public health.11 One of these was for a new hospital in Uganda for which the committee gave a free grant of £240,000, a quite unprecedented amount for a single public health scheme. In outlining their grant the committee reaffirmed the opinion—which had been put forward by Lord Passfield in 1929 and the Colonial Development Public Health Committee in 1930—that

If the productivity of the East African territories is to be fully developed, and with it, the potential capacity of those territories to absorb manufactured goods from the United Kingdom, it is essential that the standard of life of the native should be raised and to this end the eradication of disease is one of the most important measures.12

This was the CDAC’s attitude towards colonial development in a nutshell: that virtually any development in the colonies—from railways to public health—would help both Britain and the colony itself. This emphasis on indirect benefits to Britain explains why the committee paid relatively little attention to the proportion of their grants to be spent in the United Kingdom.13 In this way too the committee reached a compromise on schemes regarded as on the borderline between ‘developmental’ and ‘nondevelopmental’ whereby such schemes could still benefit the United Kingdom and increase the productiveness of the colony. Over the period from 1929 to 1940 the view that ‘social development’ was important gradually gained ground, and, perhaps as a result of the reports referred to above and Lord Hailey’s Survey, in the last year of the committee’s work possibly gained ascendancy.

## COLONIAL ECONOMIC POLICY IN THE 1930S

The impact of the 1929 Colonial Development Act on the British colonial empire in the 1930s was not great. The problems faced by the colonial economies were deep-seated, while the resources of the CDAC were very limited. The amount of money regarded as suitable for developing the empire and reducing unemployment levels in Britain—£1 million per annum—was partly decided upon as a result of an exaggerated concept of the working of the multiplier. J.H.Thomas was under the impression that the money would all be used to pay half of the interest on loans raised elsewhere—an impossibility for most colonies— and would thus result in some £40 million of work being undertaken each year.14 Leo Amery was of the opinion that money spent abroad would be three times as productive as money spent on public works at home.15 In reality, a nominal amount of £1 million a year spread over some 45 underdeveloped countries and 55 million people disappeared almost without trace. For the colonial empire as a whole Colonial Development Fund money represented only 7 per cent of the £96 million spent on capital works in the colonies between 1929 and 1938.16 Faced with the pointlessness of large transport and communications developments after 1931, the CDAC gradually—and for some members, reluctantly—fell back on attempting merely to ameliorate the shockingly low levels of health, housing and social conditions which were just beginning to be recognised.

The 1929 Act also failed because it had to work within a constricted framework of colonial economic policy. The complementary relationship between the colonies and Britain which had been built up by the dynamics of the international economy since the late nineteenth century effectively prevented the colonies from breaking out of the straitjacket of increasing dependence on a narrow group of export cash crops and mineral ores in the 1930s. Indeed, as the economic plight of Britain worsened so the constraints on the colonial economies were tightened. This can be seen in the reluctance of the British government, and many colonial governments, to encourage the diversification of colonies’ economies by the establishment of processing and secondary manufacturing industry. There was a sharp contrast between the CDAC’s aid to transport and communications in the earlier part of the decade and public health in the later part on the one hand, and their efforts in establishing new or extending existing local industries in the colonies on the other. Between 1929 and 1939 the committee granted assistance to twenty-seven schemes involving the setting up of new or the extension of existing industries, although four of these, including one for a paper pulp factory to cost £930,000 in Kenya, were withdrawn by the local government in the same or succeeding financial year. All but two of the schemes assisted were for processing of some kind, and two were for the promotion of tourism. That only 1.2 per cent of all assistance from the Colonial Development Fund was spent on local industry was hardly a true indication of the potential for the development of such industry in the colonies.

The initiative for colonial economic development lay with the local governments and the Colonial Office and neither, for differing reasons, was very interested in expanding secondary industry. In the case of many local governments, especially in Africa, this was a result of a clash between a ‘Native Policy’, such as indirect rule in Nigeria and Tanganyika, which sought to preserve indigenous political institutions and rule through them, on the one hand, and the social effects of industrialisation which were seen as undesirable, such as urbanisation, detribalisation, unemployment and so forth, on the other. ‘Developing the African along his own lines’, the catchphrase of indirect rule in Africa, tended to be interpreted solely in political terms, perhaps because it was the course of least resistance. Many of the governors in Africa in the inter-war years who were capable of instituting reform—Clifford, Guggisberg, Byrne, Cameron—concentrated on refining the political structure through which they ruled and resisting the claims of the so-called ‘westernised Africans’ living in the cities.17 Often ‘political development’ as in the establishment of indirect rule became an end in itself: in 1936 for example, the anthropologist Lucy P.Mair published Native policies in Africa.18 Her main purpose was to show that indirect rule was a socially and culturally less disruptive system of government than French assimilationism or Rhodesian segregationalism. It appeared to have no aims, however, beyond the preservation of ‘native institutions’ as viable units. As G.L.M.Clauson, assistant secretary of state at the Colonial Office, and head of the economic department, wrote in 1939, ‘Every Colonial Government is a going concern, but I am not at all sure that most Colonial Governors have any clear conception of where it is going except perhaps in the immediate future’.19

Even if local governments did wish to establish new industries and extend existing ones, there were major obstacles. First, there was the fact that many colonies lacked the expertise, especially as in the depression government staff was often reduced. Second, and more importantly, the Colonial Office and the British government were opposed to the establishment of manufacturing industry in the colonial empire. The major export commodities from British colonies were foodstuffs, raw materials and minerals, and nearly all the foodstuffs were in their unprocessed state. The prices of these commodities tended to fluctuate severely throughout the inter-war period, generally in a downward direction. In many colonies the export base was narrower at the end of the 1930s than it was before the First World War.

The traditional attitude of the British government was that the metropolitan and the colonial economies were complementary not competitive. At the Imperial Economic Conference of 1926 Leo Amery, secretary of state for the colonies, said

one of the most striking features of modern industrial development is the marriage of tropical production to the industrial production of the temperate zone. They are essentially complementary regions, and owing to their character and the character of their inhabitants they are likely to remain so.20

In the House of Commons in 1929 Amery referred again to the complementary nature of colonial trade and pointed out that

the Colonies are essentially agricultural and producers of primary commodities. It is not very probable, or indeed, very desirable in the interests of the populations themselves, that industrial development should be unduly accelerated in their case.21

The situation changed, however, with the abandonment of free trade in 1931 and the conclusion of the Ottawa Agreements in 1932. These developments raised a number of issues which had not been foreseen at the time. First, there was the problem of colonial countries replacing the Japanese as producers of cheap goods. This was most important with regard to rubber and canvas footwear manufactured in Hong Kong and, to a lesser extent, Singapore, and imported into Britain under a preferential duty. On two occasions in the 1930s the Canadian and British footwear producers attempted to come to an agreement with Hong Kong over quotas, but were unable to agree among themselves sufficiently to present a united front.

Since the Canadian and British producers could not agree, the Far Eastern manufacturers were able to continue, but the conflict served as a warning to British business that there were great dangers in imperial preference, as well as benefits, if the colonies became industrialised. This was recognised too by the British government. Neville Chamberlain, Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1934, stated that

While it was improbable that West Africa would set up factories to compete with those at home, there was a real and serious danger of such factories being established in Malaya and possibly other parts of the Colonial Empire, and we might well be faced with very serious developments of a problem of industrial competition of which we had already had some experience in the case of India.22

The response to this was to set up an inter-departmental committee in 1934 to consider industrial development in the colonies. The committee recommended that in the first place colonial industries should not be ‘artificially’ encouraged, and second, that where local workshops and factories already existed the government should seek to impose restrictions on conditions and working hours to bring them more into line with those of the United Kingdom—the constant complaint of the British manufacturer being that colonial producers benefited from low costs through ‘sweated labour’.23

The report was considered by Cabinet in February 1936 but was sent back for reconsideration with little discussion. Chamberlain thought that there should be a different policy for each of the three types of colony— the eastern ones which were already industrialised such as Hong Kong, relatively prosperous colonies like Jamaica and lastly the African and other colonies where little industry existed.24 Meanwhile a third problem of protectionism had arisen, that of colonies creating a differential between excise duty and import duty so as to favour locally produced import substitutes, particularly in beer, matches, soap, edible oils and fats and cement. Among the most persistent complainants to the Colonial Office were Ind Coope and Allsopp Ltd, two brewers, and Unilever. Clement Davies, managing director of Unilever, for example, wrote personally to Malcolm MacDonald, secretary of state for the colonies, in July 1935,

It does seem extraordinary that these colonies, without improving the lot of their own people…should in effect stop imports from this country, especially imports of goods manufactured by a company which purchases from those colonies raw materials which are grown in those colonies and upon which the colonies exist.25

These complaints, in addition to the Hong Kong dispute and the passing of legislation such as Malta’s Encouragement of New Industries Act and Jamaica’s Safeguarding of Local Industries Law—which enabled the local governments to grant monopolies for the production of scheduled commodities—led to a new inter-departmental committee being set up in 1937. This was ‘to consider and report how far it is desirable to frame and pursue a policy either to encourage or to discourage the establishment of industrial enterprises in the Colonial Empire’, as the question was ‘constantly turning up in one form or another’.26

The problem proved so difficult, however, that even by December 1938 only the second draft of the committee’s report had been written. The committee came to the broad conclusion that industries in the colonies which could only exist with government assistance, usually in the form of an excise duty-import duty differential, ‘Will place a permanent burden on the local community and are more likely to impoverish that community than enrich it.’27 Therefore where the Colonial Office had the power—and effectively it did not in colonies such as Malaya, Malta, Ceylon and Jamaica—local governments should not be allowed to assist local industries by means of licencing or tariff policy. This was as far as the committee reached by the end of 1938 and its report was considered far too revealing and contentious to circulate to the colonies, and it was put aside. Sir John Campbell remarked of the report, ‘It is altogether too dangerous, too full of explosive possibilities, too little susceptible of reduction to clear formulae, for a report which will presumably be circulated generally and will doubtless be published eventually, or leak out eventually.’28

The policy reached by the committee, however, was essentially the same as that exercised by the Colonial Office in a piecemeal fashion in dealing with individual cases. In nearly every case of a new industry being established some form of protection was regarded by the promoter and/or the local government as necessary, and if the colony was one over which the Colonial Office had sufficient influence, the granting of protection was refused.

The belief that industries established behind tariff protection were uneconomic in the long run, that infant industries never grow up and that the colonies should remain primary producers, was widely held in the Colonial Office. J.A.Calder, assistant secretary at the Colonial Office argued in June 1939 that the order of priority for colonial development should be firstly agriculture for food and export, secondly—‘and a long way behind’—the development of mineral resources, and lastly secondary industry:

an important matter in itself but one for which there can be, comparatively speaking, little scope until the standards of living of the agricultural primary producers have been raised to much higher levels than exist at present in the Colonial Empire. The manufacturing industry, which can be established in a colony only at the price of a monopoly protected by a high tariff, ends in producing a locally manufactured article which is too expensive for the primary agricultural producers to buy.29

The Colonial Office advocated strict free trade for the colonies at a time when all other countries, including Britain, had abandoned the principle.

At the same time there was a strong element of protecting the United Kingdom manufacturer and exporter involved in the Colonial Office’s policy towards colonial industrial development. In 1936 J.Melville, an assistant principal, wrote, in connection with a scheme for sugar ref ining in Palestine, tha t the Colonial Office polic y towards industrialisation in the colonies ‘is to oppose the establishment in the Colonial Empire of a new industry which is likely to affect adversely the interests of established United Kingdom industries’.30 Sir Henry Moore, assistant secretary, noted that the recommendations of the 1937 interdepartmental committee on colonial industry went as far as they could for, ‘No doubt a more forward policy would alar m the home manufacturers’;31 and in 1939 he wrote:

at present any proposals for the creation of secondary industry in the Colonial Empire are received with a marked lack of enthusiasm, if not with suspicion. The reason for this, I suggest, appears to me to be found in the more or less unwritten rule that any proposals, whether in the field of industry or tariffs, which give rise to any conflict of economic interest, should be approached from the standpoint that United Kingdom trade interests must rank first, Dominion trade interests second, and those of the Colonial Empire last.32

Sir Henr y Moore, unlike the other administrative officials in the Colonial Office had been a colonial governor (of Sierra Leone); most of his colleagues had never visited the colonies they dealt with. The Colonial Office was always anxious to avoid giving the impression that they were holding a brief for the United Kingdom manufacturer, but the Board of Trade and the Treasury were quite clear whose interests came first. It is doubtful whether the Cabinet would have allowed a secretary of state for the colonies to promote industrial development behind tariff walls even if he had wanted to do so; the most Sir Phillip Cunliffe-Lister, for example, when he was colonial secretary in 1934 had asked for was that Cabinet would ‘approve the principle that we should endeavour to get all the advantages we possibly could for the Colonial Empire [in tariff negotiations] provided this involved no prejudice or damage to the United Kingdom’.33 In the 1920s the Colonial Office was petitioned by cotton and engineering manufacturers, not to mention the Board of Trade, for transport development to open up East Africa; in the 1930s footwear, margarine and beer manufacturers wrote angry letters demanding protection from ‘unfair’ competition.

The failure of the 1929 Colonial Development Act and the lack of any real power of the CDAC suggests that it was the colonial and imperial governments rather than the committee itself which were responsible for the failure to promote economic development in the 1930s. The local governments, on whom the responsibility for initiating schemes rested, tended to be limited in outlook, both through natural conservatism and the belief in a form of political rule which implied an unchanging social and economic structure. Local governments were, however, very much influenced by the Colonial Office which regarded the establishment of secondary industry in the colonies as undesirable for social and economic reasons, and by the British government who saw in colonial industrialisation the spectre of ‘unfair competition’, and indeed in the case of Hong Kong felt that this had already arrived. Although Britain abandoned free trade in 1931 and most industrialised countries had done so already, the colonies were expected to give a tarif f pref erence to British manufactur es and to refrain fr om encouraging local manufacturing enterprise.

Reviewing the measures taken to promote colonial development in the 1920s and 1930s it seems clear that the provision of British colonial aid in the inter-war period was closely linked to problems at home and tended at best to take the form of piecemeal treatment of symptoms rather than causes, and at worst hurried reaction to crises. The Colonial Office had no clear strategy for the long-term economic crises and no clear strategy for the long-term economic development of the colonial empire, and for most colonies could see no alternative to a total reliance on primary produce for export. As the governor of Nigeria wrote in 1939 to the secretary of state,

Table 8.3 Public debt, selected colonies, 1928 to 1938 (£m)
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1928</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya Uganda</td><td>13.5 1.1</td><td>13.5 1.1</td><td>16.9 1.1</td><td>16.9 1.1</td><td>16.9 2.0</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.2 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td><td>17.6 2.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanga-</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>nyika Nyasaland</td><td>5.2 0.8</td><td>5.2 0.8</td><td>5.2 0.9</td><td>8.2 1.1</td><td>8.2 3.2</td><td>8.2 3.3</td><td>8.2 5.0</td><td>8.2 5.1</td><td>8.2 5.2</td><td>8.2 5.3</td><td>8.2 5.4</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Goast</td><td>11.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>13.0</td><td>11.9</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>11.4</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>23.6</td><td>23.6</td><td>28.4</td><td>28.4</td><td>27.8</td><td>27.8</td><td>28.0</td><td>28.0</td><td>24.8</td><td>24.8</td><td>24.8</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>12.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>15.9</td><td>15.9</td><td>16.0</td><td>16.0</td><td>14.9</td><td>14.0</td><td>12.5</td><td>14.6</td><td>12.2</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius West Indies</td><td>1.9</td><td>1.9</td><td>2.8</td><td>2.8</td><td>3.4</td><td>3.4</td><td>3.3</td><td>2.9.</td><td>2.9</td><td>2.9</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>British</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.2</td><td>10.4</td><td>10.4</td><td>11.0</td><td>9.1</td><td>8.4</td><td>9.7</td><td>10.3</td><td>10.3</td></tr><tr><td>Guiana</td><td>2.6</td><td>2.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.7</td><td>4.5</td><td>4.6</td><td>4.9</td><td>4.5</td><td>4.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>83.7</td><td>86.1</td><td></td><td></td><td>99.1 102.4 105.6 106.8 104.3 102.0</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>99.4 101.8</td><td>99.7</td></tr></table>

Source: Statistical Abstract of the British Empire, Nos. 57, 58, 65 & 67; Colonial Annual Reports.

the plain fact is that no British Government has yet laid down a clear cut policy in this important matter of colonial development…. All that the Government of 1929 did was to recognise the propriety of granting casual assistance, strictly limited in amount, towards development…. The ‘doctrine of individual self-sufficiency’ has never been abandoned.34

Some degree of aid was channelled through the CDAC, but responsibility for initiating schemes rested with the local governments whose low level of applications for funds led to the Colonial Development Fund being underspent in most years. And yet when, in 1938 and 1939, the reorganisation of the CDAC was under discussion and it was suggested that the new development committee should be able to initiate schemes, this was firmly rejected on the grounds that such powers would undermine the authority of the secretary of state.35

## THE IMPACT OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION

The various official loans, culminating in those under the Colonial Development Act, made to the tropical colonies as part of Britain’s antiunemployment policies were only a small part of public investment in the colonies in the 1920s and 1930s. Public debt in the nine colonies shown in Table 8.3 increased by over $\mathcal { L } 7 0$ million between 1919 and 1930 and peaked at about £125 million in the mid-1930s. Very little of this debt was locally subscribed after the British capital market reopened at the end of the First World War. Thus the colonies’ public debt was also largely their public foreign debt and had to be serviced as to interest and repayments from export earnings. Indeed, the high prices paid for export commodities in the early 1920s convinced colonial governments that they should borrow heavily through the London money market in order to press on with the transport and communications projects regarded as vital to expand export volumes and hence overall export revenue. Implicitly they held the view that export growth and economic growth were positively correlated. The war showed up the inadequacies of colonial infrastructure; the post-war boom appeared to provide the means to finance more rapid economic development from the public purse. Most of these loans contracted in the 1920s were for railways, roads and harbours; typically they were spread over twenty-five to thirty-five years and carried a rate of interest of between 4 and 6 per cent. The projects on which these borrowed funds were expended were generally ones which took a considerable time to complete and where the economic returns were not usually dramatic. Their potential contribution to export earnings was through reduction of transport costs and easing of handling bottlenecks, but this would only augment export earnings if export prices remained reasonably high. In the 1930s export prices collapsed and, as a result, a substantial gap opened up between total public debt and gross export values. Since debts were not permitted to be written off or modified as to servicing, a serious foreign debt burden developed in many tropical colonies by the later 1930s.

The impact of the world depression on colonial indebtedness varied. Least troubled was Malaya where good export earnings from rubber and tin had enabled the public debt/export ratio to be kept relatively low and where the government-owned railways were profitable even in the early 1930s. Table 8.4 shows the debt burden for a number of tropical colonies in the mid-1930s. The burden was greatest on the more recent additions to the British Empire—East, Central and West Africa. In these colonies public debt charges absorbed over one-quarter of public expenditure in most cases. The colonies in Asia were less affected by debt servicing problems because they had been borrowing for longer and had not expanded their public debt so readily as the African ones in the postwar boom.

The debt crisis in Britain’s tropical colonies in the 1930s should be kept in perspective. These funds were lent for a long period which permitted sinking fund payments to be low (generally 1 to 1.25 per cent), and the average rate of interest, although about one-third higher than before the First World War, was less than 5 per cent.36 A few colonies were able to take advantage of the lower rates of interest prevailing by the mid-1930s to refinance earlier loans. Others received grants from the Colonial Development Fund (CDF) to pay interest for a number of years. Prior to

Table 8.4 Public debt burden, selected colonies, 1936
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Year</td><td>Public debt (£000)</td><td>Public debt charges (£000)</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of public debtg</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of gTOSS government expenditure</td><td>Public debt charges as a % of exports of domestic</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>1936</td><td>17581</td><td>1043</td><td>5.9</td><td>31.8</td><td>produce 29.1</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>1936</td><td>2236</td><td>135</td><td>6.0</td><td>8.4</td><td>3.1</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>1936</td><td>8191</td><td>436</td><td>5.3</td><td>24.5</td><td>10.9</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>1936</td><td>2347</td><td>120</td><td>5.1</td><td>16.3</td><td>2.1</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>1937</td><td>5264</td><td>278</td><td>5.3</td><td>42.1</td><td>31.4</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>19367</td><td>11435</td><td>660</td><td>5.8</td><td>23.5</td><td>7.2u</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>19356</td><td>27965</td><td>1609</td><td>5.8</td><td>28.0</td><td>14.4b</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>19356</td><td>14082</td><td>632</td><td>4.5</td><td>7.8</td><td>3.5a</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>19367</td><td>2879</td><td>174</td><td>6.0</td><td>16.5</td><td>6.5&quot;</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya</td><td>1936</td><td>7617</td><td>758</td><td>9.8</td><td>12.5</td><td>15.8</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>19367</td><td>3974</td><td>233</td><td>5.9</td><td>11.9</td><td>4.9c</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>1936</td><td>4223</td><td>240</td><td>5.7</td><td>12.9</td><td>4.8</td></tr><tr><td>Brit. Guiana</td><td>1936</td><td>4857</td><td>242</td><td>5.0</td><td>23.3</td><td>10.8</td></tr></table>

a 1936; b1935; c1937.  
Source: Economic Survey of the Colonial Empire; Statistical Abstract of the British Empire, Nos. 66, 67, 68.

1936, for example, a CDF grant of £500,000 paid most of Nyasaland’s interest costs, though when it expired the Nyasaland government had to devote over 40 per cent of its annual expenditure to servicing its public debt (see Table 8.4). Nevertheless, the colonial debt problem in the 1930s highlighted the development strategy of the previous decades and brought into question the appropriateness of financing large-scale transport and communication projects by long-term loans which could become a serious burden to the borrowing colonies. Since the immediate motivation of the British government for encouraging colonial governments to borrow development capital was to stimulate orders for British industry, it was sometimes suggested in the later 1930s that outright grants, especially for the least developed African colonies, would be a more effective policy.

At the same time as debt servicing became a more significant item in colonial public expenditure, the slump in export earnings also resulted in considerable reductions in total government outlays. With the exception of Northern Rhodesia, where an economic boom occurred in the second half of the 1930s based on the expansion of copper mining, colonial treasuries were reduced by up to 50 per cent at the depth of the depression. Most colonies relied heavily on customs revenue and it was inevitable that in the trade slump this would fall severely. Other sources of revenue, such as direct taxation, could not easily be developed and by the late 1930s customs revenue still accounted for about 45 per cent of total government revenue. Expenditure also declined, though at first not by so great a proportion as revenue as budget deficits continued to be run in nearly all colonies until 1933. Table 8.5 illustrates the change brought about by the depression: from the budget deficits of the late 1920s and early 1930s, financed by external borrowing, to the budget surpluses which were regarded as necessary in the second half of the 1930s to continue to finance the colonial debts. At the lowest point, public expenditure fell in most of the colonies shown in Table 8.5 by between 5 per cent (Jamaica) and 50 per cent (Federated Malay States) compared with the average for 1929.

The impact of the depression can be further illustrated by examination of the main items of colonial government expenditure shown in Table 8.6. Debt servicing, pensions paid to retired British officials and expenditure on law and order could account together for as much as 40 per cent of government expenditure in some colonies, and administration costs absorbed at least a further one-third, much of it in salaries of British colonial officials. This left relatively small amounts for social services and even less for economic development.

The mini-boom in world trade which occurred in 1937 lifted colonial government revenues. Public expenditure was generally above the predepression levels by 1938, except in the eastern colonies of Ceylon, Malaya and Mauritius. Some of the impact of reduced government outlays was offset by falls in the general price level (Britain’s retail prices fell by 15 per cent between 1927–9 and 1933). Nevertheless the world trade collapse and financial crisis resulted in significant falls in real living standards for most of the 1930s in the tropical colonies, some of the social and political consequences of which were evident by the late 1930s and are discussed in Chapter 9. By the mid-1930s colonial government services were reduced in terms of staff and expenditure to a point not experienced since the end of the First World War.37

The Great Depression was transmitted to tropical primary producing and exporting countries by the collapse of prices paid for their exports. Britain’s tropical colonies—like most indebted primary exporters— responded to falling prices by raising the volume of produce exported. Although in the short run this reaction could cushion the fall in export earnings, it added to the world economy’s over-supply of foodstuffs and raw materials and eventually led to further price reductions. The pattern of price collapse varied between the main export commodities but generally the years of steepest descent were 1929 to 1934. Some price recovery occurred in the mid-1930s, usually peaking in 1937, but prices declined thereafter and were sluggish in 1938 and 1939. The capacity to increase output also varied: some export crops were newly established in the immediate pre-war or post-war period and production was expanding at the onset of the depression (e.g. cotton, sisal, and coffee); in other cases, the industry was a long-established one which was operating at near to full capacity by the late 1920s (e.g. sugar, tea, palm oil and copra).

Table 8.5 Balance of public revenue and expenditure, selected colonies, 1929–38 (£000)
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>-171</td><td>-197</td><td>-149</td><td>-109</td><td>-46</td><td>+3</td><td>+36</td><td>+165</td><td>+80</td><td>+127</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>+76</td><td>-228</td><td>-52</td><td>+66</td><td>+74</td><td>+166</td><td>+127</td><td>+89</td><td>+219</td><td>-156</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>-92</td><td>354</td><td>299</td><td>+36</td><td>-86</td><td>-151</td><td>+224</td><td>+176</td><td>+171</td><td>-133</td></tr><tr><td>North Rhodesia</td><td>+117</td><td>+125</td><td>+.36</td><td>-177</td><td>+10</td><td>-20</td><td>+27</td><td>-24</td><td>+73</td><td>+176</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>-21</td><td>+14</td><td>-20</td><td>+25</td><td>+13</td><td>-11</td><td>+26</td><td>+41</td><td>+27</td><td>+.32</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>464</td><td>-222</td><td>-540</td><td>−2</td><td>+372</td><td>+82</td><td>+41</td><td>-27</td><td>+175</td><td>+291</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>-245</td><td>708</td><td>1330</td><td>+1</td><td>-149</td><td>+124</td><td></td><td>+239+1716</td><td>+1592</td><td>655</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylona</td><td>-1356</td><td>+49</td><td>+126</td><td></td><td>902 +1005</td><td>+800</td><td>-621</td><td>523</td><td>+780</td><td>-149</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritiush</td><td>-271</td><td>-82</td><td>-341</td><td></td><td>−416 +1229</td><td>+145</td><td>+173</td><td>+19</td><td>+31</td><td>+106</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya&quot;</td><td>334</td><td>-1973</td><td>-1145</td><td>-1138</td><td>-357</td><td>+1367</td><td>+1312</td><td>+1795</td><td>+1134</td><td>-128</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>-17</td><td>-125</td><td>50</td><td>+87</td><td>-149</td><td>+4</td><td>-57</td><td>+6</td><td>+205</td><td>+74</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>+257</td><td>+57</td><td>-451</td><td>1</td><td>+1</td><td>+1</td><td>+2</td><td>+706</td><td>+393</td><td>+253</td></tr><tr><td>British Guiana</td><td>+126</td><td>-80</td><td>-159</td><td>-16</td><td>+19</td><td>+66</td><td>39</td><td>+10</td><td>30</td><td>−10</td></tr></table>

a Year ended 30 September; b Year ended 30 June; c Federated Malay States. Excess of ordinary revenue over ordinary recurrent expenditure shown +. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, Nos. 68, 69.

Table 8.6 Analysis of recurrent public expenditure, selected colonies, 1934.
<table><tr><td colspan="7">Object of expenditure (% of total)</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>Public debt Pensions charges</td><td></td><td>1aw &amp; ordera</td><td>Social servicesb</td><td>Economic services</td><td>Adnini- stration d</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya</td><td>9.2</td><td>8.6</td><td>4.4</td><td>21.9</td><td>20.7</td><td>35.2</td></tr><tr><td>Uganda</td><td>8.3</td><td>6.2</td><td>4.0</td><td>25.5</td><td>16.8</td><td>39.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td>6.2</td><td>3.9</td><td>4.9</td><td>16.9</td><td>10.8</td><td>57.3</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesia</td><td>12.8</td><td>10.2</td><td>3.5</td><td>20.8</td><td>10.2</td><td>42.5</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>15.2</td><td>8.6</td><td>4.7</td><td>16.8</td><td>14.5</td><td>40.2</td></tr><tr><td>Nigetia</td><td>16.8</td><td>9.9</td><td>6.8</td><td>16.6</td><td>16.4</td><td>33.5</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>4.3</td><td>10.4</td><td>3.9</td><td>25.8</td><td>11.6</td><td>44.0</td></tr><tr><td>Sicrra Leone</td><td>7.6</td><td>9.6</td><td>6.6</td><td>19.9</td><td>7.2</td><td>49.1</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>13.4</td><td>11.4</td><td>2.4</td><td>32.2</td><td>12.4</td><td>28.2</td></tr><tr><td>Fed. Malay States</td><td>15.4</td><td>16.0</td><td>2.7</td><td>18.4</td><td>11.6</td><td>35.9</td></tr><tr><td>Straits</td><td>0.1</td><td>7.6</td><td>13.4</td><td>28.5</td><td>13.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Settlements</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>36.7</td></tr><tr><td>Hong Kong</td><td>4.8</td><td>6.9</td><td>17.0</td><td>25.5</td><td>8.7</td><td>37.1</td></tr><tr><td>Barbados</td><td>3.9</td><td>7.9</td><td>1,0</td><td>32.3</td><td>8.4</td><td>46.5</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Guiana</td><td>26.6</td><td>9.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>28.8</td><td>1.3</td><td>32.9</td></tr><tr><td>Br. Honduras</td><td>23.1</td><td>6.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>19.8</td><td>5.8</td><td>43.9</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica</td><td>5.1</td><td>1.8</td><td>0.9</td><td>32.5</td><td>4.9</td><td>51.8</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>10.7</td><td>7.8</td><td>0.3</td><td>37.8</td><td>14.3</td><td>29.1</td></tr><tr><td>Antigua</td><td>4.8</td><td>9.9</td><td>0.5</td><td>45.6</td><td>9.7</td><td>29.5</td></tr><tr><td>St Kils</td><td>3.7</td><td>9.7</td><td>0.7</td><td>47.2</td><td>8.7</td><td>30.4</td></tr><tr><td>Fiji</td><td>13.6</td><td>5.7</td><td>0.7</td><td>27.7</td><td>12.7</td><td>39.6</td></tr></table>

a Defence, police, prisons, judiciary; b medical, public health, education, labour, food subsidies, housing; cAgriculture, veterinary, forestry, transport and communications, public works, mines, water supply and irrigation, electricity; dincludes self-balancing departments and miscellaneous.

Export earnings, shown in Table 8.7, plummeted from over £207 million (for the tropical colonial empire as a whole) in 1929 to £155 million in 1930, £104 million in 1931 and to a low point of £93 million in 1932. Recovery to a pre-1929 level of export earnings took until 1937 to achieve and was followed by a further fall in 1938. The impact of the depression on the direction of exports from the colonial empire was fairly slight: the average proportion consigned to the UK in 1927–9 was 25 per cent, in 1937–9 it was 29.6 per cent. This shift was presumably the result of tariff preferences given in the British market to empire produce after the Ottawa Conference in 1932, together with the breakdown of the international monetary system and emergence of the Sterling Area of which the colonial empire was part. However, the level of tariff preference for most tropical products was small and in some cases (e.g. cocoa) the UK market could not absorb all of the colonial empire’s exports and in such instances the effect of the preference was negligible.

An important consequence of the drive to expand exports in the tropical colonies from the late nineteenth century was the rising volume of imports. By 1929 the tropical colonial economies were far more dependent upon imported goods (about one quarter of which came from Britain) than at the beginning of the century. Total imports were valued at over £200 million a year from 1925 to 1929. As can be seen from Table 8.7, with the decline of export earnings after 1929, most colonies experienced balance of trade deficits until imports could be curtailed and export earnings increased to produce export surpluses again from 1933. For the rest of the decade colonies required large export surpluses in order to service their foreign debt to Britain and imports continued to be low compared with the mid-1920s.38 To the extent that colonial imports consisted of mass consumer goods, which predominately they did, constriction of imports resulted in a decline in living standards. Imported capital goods were also limited, which made it more difficult in the later 1930s to develop new areas of economic growth (in particular import-substituting industry) which required such imports to set up or expand. Thus the burden of external debt which forced colonies to try to earn large export surpluses in a world economy which was virtually static was felt not only through its depressive effects on material living standards, but also by the constraints it imposed on structural diversification.

The price collapse in the international economy in the early 1930s affected primary products to a greater degree than manufactured and capital goods. As the tropical colonies were entirely reliant on primary produce exports and generally their imports consisted largely of secondary goods (but not wholly, for some colonies imported large quantities of basic foodstuffs, especially rice), a deterioration in their terms of trade was unavoidable. Table 8.8 presents an estimate of the terms of trade of eight colonies which between them accounted for about 90 per cent of the trade of the tropical colonial empire. The experience of each colony was different and since the import mix was diverse while the range of exports quite small (and statistics relating to the former were less comprehensive than those for exports), these ‘terms of trade’ calculations must be regarded only as an indication of the relative price movements.39 Generally the price fall for primary products preceded that of manufactures so that terms of trade moved swiftly down in 1930 to 1933 in most cases. Once primary prices levelled out an improvement in the terms of trade was experienced as cheaper imports began to arrive. Import prices also levelled out in the mid-1930s and as export prices rose in the brief boom of 1936–7, the terms of trade continued to rise; this improvement was ended in 1938, while in 1939 some export prices were stimulated by the onset of the war in Europe.

orts, exports and balance of trade, selected colonies, 19
<table><tr><td>Colonies</td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td><td>1989</td></tr><tr><td>Imports</td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>25106</td><td>22987</td><td>12184</td><td>14057</td><td>12688</td><td>10857</td><td>16790</td><td>21240</td><td>29328</td><td>17933</td><td>15658</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>15610</td><td>13380</td><td>9235</td><td>7610</td><td>7576</td><td>8633</td><td>10427</td><td>11292</td><td>14879</td><td>13221</td><td>12532</td></tr><tr><td>Centrat Africa</td><td>4398</td><td>5717</td><td>6138</td><td>2669</td><td>2602</td><td>3445</td><td>3589</td><td>3009</td><td>4798</td><td>6001</td><td>5406</td></tr><tr><td>Easter</td><td>137562</td><td>109102</td><td>72295</td><td>61222</td><td>56870</td><td>72786</td><td>74209</td><td>77646</td><td>100876</td><td>84551</td><td>93563</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbeatt</td><td>18248</td><td>16143</td><td>12901</td><td>12422</td><td>12280</td><td>13287</td><td>13599</td><td>15400</td><td>19064</td><td>18898</td><td>19189</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>1454</td><td>1219</td><td>926</td><td>855</td><td>929</td><td>887</td><td>1121</td><td>1347</td><td>1576</td><td>1504</td><td>1464</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>202378</td><td>168548</td><td>113679</td><td>98835</td><td>92945</td><td>109895</td><td>119735</td><td>129934</td><td>170034</td><td>142108</td><td>147812</td></tr><tr><td>Exports</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>31653</td><td>26034</td><td>16535</td><td>17123</td><td>15868</td><td>15274</td><td>19756</td><td>26553</td><td>34734</td><td>18403</td><td>19251</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>14471</td><td>11101</td><td>8334</td><td>8625</td><td>10135</td><td>10143</td><td>12319</td><td>14966</td><td>16602</td><td>13958</td><td>14120</td></tr><tr><td>Central Africa</td><td>1522</td><td>1550</td><td>1686</td><td>3313</td><td>4245</td><td>5167</td><td>5524</td><td>6821</td><td>12895</td><td>11092</td><td>11044</td></tr><tr><td>Eastemn</td><td>141728</td><td>101945</td><td>65135</td><td>52967</td><td>59996</td><td>84030</td><td>86563</td><td>94712</td><td>131352</td><td>89255</td><td>112130</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>15824</td><td>13381</td><td>10983</td><td>11056</td><td>9820</td><td>11038</td><td>11705</td><td>1313657</td><td>15877</td><td>16057</td><td>16005</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>1708</td><td>1452</td><td>997</td><td>1662</td><td>1438</td><td>1270</td><td>1549</td><td>1757</td><td>1822</td><td>1645</td><td>1620</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>206906</td><td>155463</td><td>103670</td><td>94746</td><td>101502</td><td>126922</td><td>137416</td><td>158466</td><td>213282</td><td>150410</td><td>174170</td></tr><tr><td>Balance</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>West Africa</td><td>6547</td><td>3047</td><td>4351</td><td>3066</td><td>3180</td><td>4417</td><td>2966</td><td>5313</td><td>5406</td><td>470</td><td>3793</td></tr><tr><td>East Africa</td><td>-1139</td><td>2279</td><td>-901</td><td>1015</td><td>2559</td><td>1510</td><td>1892</td><td>3674</td><td>1723</td><td>737</td><td>1588</td></tr><tr><td>Central Africa</td><td>2876</td><td>4167</td><td>-4452</td><td>644</td><td>1643</td><td>1722</td><td>1935</td><td>5812</td><td>8097</td><td>5091</td><td>5638</td></tr><tr><td>Eastern</td><td>4166</td><td>-7157</td><td>-7160</td><td>-8255</td><td>3126</td><td>11244</td><td>12354</td><td>17066</td><td>30476</td><td>4704</td><td>18567</td></tr><tr><td>Caribbean</td><td>2424</td><td>-2762</td><td>-1918</td><td>-1366</td><td>-2460</td><td>-2249</td><td>-1894</td><td>-1743</td><td>3187</td><td>2841</td><td>3184</td></tr><tr><td>Pacific</td><td>254</td><td>233</td><td>71</td><td>807</td><td>509</td><td>383</td><td>428</td><td>410</td><td>246</td><td>141</td><td>156</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>4528</td><td>-13085</td><td>-10009</td><td>4089</td><td>8557</td><td>17027</td><td>17681</td><td>28532</td><td>42761</td><td>8302</td><td>26358</td></tr></table>

Import volumes also declined in the depression, particularly of manufactured goods such as cotton textiles, but also of basic foodstuffs. There was a tendency for cheaper, lower quality imports to be substituted for the more expensive, higher quality ones: dried and salted food replaced canned food, rubber and canvas footwear replaced leather footwear, rice replaced flour and so on. Colonies which normally imported large quantities of basic foodstuffs found their import bill declined dramatically as both prices and volumes fell: this largely explains the less adverse terms of trade movements in the cases of Mauritius, Ceylon and the West Indies. Malaya experienced very volatile export prices as rubber and, (to a lesser extent), tin prices crashed in the early 1930s before recovering under the influence of government pricesupport schemes.40 Malaya benefited too from cheaper rice imports from 1931 on. The tropical African colonies were probably the most adversely affected in international trade by the 1930s depression. Coffee, cotton, cocoa, sisal, palm oil and palm kernels and groundnuts generally fell in price by over 50 per cent in the first half of the decade and were not ‘strategic’ to the rearmament programmes to enjoy rising demand in the late 1930s. Some of these export crops were ones which had expanded rapidly in the 1920s and in which indigenous and expatriate capital and enterprise had been heavily invested. Their anticipated expansion also underpinned much of the public expenditure on railways, roads and harbours after the First World War. In contrast to the Eastern and West Indian colonies, the tropical African ones imported a relatively high proportion of manufactures and did not benefit to the same extent therefore from cheaper basic foodstuffs.

rms of trade, selected colonies, 1929–39 (19
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td></td><td>1929</td><td>1930</td><td>1931</td><td>1932</td><td>1933</td><td>1934</td><td>1935</td><td>1936</td><td>1937</td><td>1938</td><td>1939</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>E I T</td><td>84.9 96.2 88</td><td>77.0 87.6 88</td><td>48.4 79.0 61</td><td>53.0 76.2 70</td><td>44.8 72.8 62</td><td>37.7 70.9 53</td><td>42.6 73.5 58</td><td>51.9 69.8 74</td><td>87.0 79.6 109</td><td>42.0 78.9 53</td><td>42.3 81.0 52</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeria</td><td>E I T E</td><td>95.0 105.2 90 104.0</td><td>78.8 94.2 84 78.3</td><td>48.0 80.7 60 57.9</td><td>50.0 76.2 66 57.2</td><td>47.9 73.8 65 55.8</td><td>43.2 67.8 64 57.8</td><td>52.7 71.3 71 58.9</td><td>59.4 71.6 83 58.9</td><td>69.5 80.0 87 70.2</td><td>43.6 80.3 54</td><td>43.0 78.6 55</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td>I T E</td><td>99.4 105 87.2</td><td>94.4 83 65.4</td><td>76.1 76 60.3</td><td>72.8 79 65.4</td><td>67.8 82 66.7</td><td>67.5 86 64.1</td><td>69.4 85 56.4</td><td>67.7 87 55.1</td><td>81.3 86 55.1</td><td>51.6 82.8 62</td><td>50.9 81.3 63</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I T E</td><td>95.4 91 86.3</td><td>83.6 78 71.3</td><td>62.1 97 50.8</td><td>59.9 109 42.8</td><td>52.2 128 48.7</td><td>52.8 121 60.4</td><td>54.0 104 66.4</td><td>54.9 100 72.8</td><td>57.2 96 81.5</td><td>55.1 61.6 89 69.4</td><td>61.5 58.7 105 81.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I T E</td><td>97.4 91 45.9</td><td>80.5 78 58.0</td><td>65.8 97 35.6</td><td>59.8 109 32.2</td><td>55.3 128 43.1</td><td>57.7 121 63.4</td><td>58.9 104 84.0</td><td>55.6 100 74.8</td><td>55.8 96 91.4</td><td>57.8 89 66.9</td><td>56.6 105 85.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>I T E</td><td>96.6 48 101.0</td><td>92.6 63 80.6</td><td>76.4 47 68.7</td><td>72.2 45 72.4</td><td>61.8 70 73.9</td><td>58.0 109 80.3</td><td>60.7 138 81.6</td><td>60.8 123 79.6</td><td>60.9 150 82.9</td><td>60.5 111 91.3</td><td>58.4 146 98.2</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>I T</td><td>99.0 102</td><td>92.4 97 79.6</td><td>79.2 87 55.8</td><td>75.7 96</td><td>67.2 110</td><td>64.6 124</td><td>67.5 121</td><td>67.2 118</td><td>73.1 113</td><td>72.7 126</td><td>70.1 140</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>E I T</td><td>84.3 98.3 86</td><td>94.3 85</td><td>77.1 72</td><td>58.4 74.5 78</td><td>55.8 67.0 83</td><td>61.5 63.8 96</td><td>53.7 65.4 82</td><td>61.8 66.5 93</td><td>72.3 75.8 95</td><td>57.2 73.0 78</td><td>65.4 73.1 90</td></tr></table>

ed index of the unit value of principal ed index of the unit value of principal s of trade: E divided by I× atistical Abstract for the British Empire,

Attempts by Britain to exclude Japanese competition in manufactures from these colonies also had the effect of keeping manufactures import prices higher than elsewhere.41 The African colonies revealed most acutely the problems which arose from the international division of labour at a time of widespread trade contraction.

The depression also highlighted the narrow range of exports of the tropical colonies. In many cases the range was narrower by the end of the 1930s than in the pre-war or 1920s periods, as shown in Table 8.9: this was true of Kenya—Uganda, Tanganyika, Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, the Gold Coast, Ceylon, Malaya, Mauritius, Barbados, Jamaica, British Guiana and British Honduras. Despite the development of new cash crops and mineral exports, the export base remained narrow: the first three export commodities by value accounted for over 70 per cent of total export earnings in all the colonies included in Table 8.9 (except Nigeria) and as much as 98 per cent in several instances. This represented a degree of vulnerability to the vagaries of the international economy which had become a structural feature of tropical colonial economies by the Second World War and was one which would prove difficult to alter substantially.

By the end of the 1930s, then, a severe economic crisis had developed in Britain’s tropical colonies. Some attempt had been made to follow the philosophy of the Joseph Chamberlain model of developing the ‘Great Estate’ but it was predicated on a continuing expansion of the world economy and of Britain’s place within it. When the international economy faltered in the mid-1920s and collapsed altogether in the Great Depression in the 1930s it left the very open colonial economies to varying degrees depressed, debt-ridden and disillusioned. The Great Depression weakened Britain’s relationship with its tropical colonies and created a growing recognition of a specific ‘colonial problem’ and of a need for colonial reform. It is to these aspects that we turn now.

<table><tr><td colspan="8">Ta   r 0 190911, 19213 and 19348</td></tr><tr><td>Colony</td><td>18991901a</td><td></td><td>190911</td><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td></td><td>19348</td></tr><tr><td>Gold Coast</td><td>Rubber</td><td>39.6</td><td>Cocoa Gold</td><td>37.9 33.2</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>77.5 Cocoa</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm oil</td><td>28.0</td><td></td><td>Gold</td><td>11.6</td><td>Gold</td><td>29.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>11.8</td><td>Rubber</td><td>9.8 Kola &#x27;I&#x27;otal</td><td>4.9 77.5</td><td>Manganese</td><td>6.4 92.1</td></tr><tr><td>Nigeriab</td><td>Total</td><td>79.4</td><td>Total</td><td>80.9</td><td></td><td>Total</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>51.7</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>49.2</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>21.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Palm oil</td><td>23.8</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>35.2</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>26.5 Groundnuts</td><td>19.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>9.4</td><td>Rubber</td><td>4.3</td><td>Tin ore</td><td>10.9 Cocoa</td><td>16.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>84.9</td><td>Total</td><td>88.7</td><td>Total</td><td>71.3 Total</td><td>57.4</td></tr><tr><td>Sierra Leone</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>55.8</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>65.3</td><td>Palm kernels</td><td>68.6 Diamonds 20.2</td><td>36.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Kola</td><td>21.5</td><td>Kola</td><td>19.8 Kola</td><td></td><td>Palm kernels 5.0</td><td>35.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber Total</td><td>8.9</td><td>Palm oil</td><td>7.2 Palm oil Total</td><td></td><td>Iron ore</td><td>20.3</td></tr><tr><td>Kenya-Uganda</td><td></td><td>86.2</td><td>Total</td><td>92.3</td><td></td><td>93.8 Total</td><td>92.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ivory Rubber</td><td>59.8</td><td>Cotton Hides</td><td>33.2 17.3</td><td>Cotton Coffee</td><td>41.6 Cotton 11.6</td><td>47.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Hides</td><td>11.8 7.6</td><td></td><td>8.9</td><td></td><td>Coffee 5.8</td><td>15.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>78.6</td><td>Ivory</td><td>Sisal 59.4 Total</td><td></td><td>Sisal Total</td><td>7.0 69.2</td></tr><tr><td>Tanganyika</td><td></td><td></td><td>Total</td><td></td><td></td><td>59.0 Sisal</td><td>43.2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>Hemp Groundnuts</td><td>22.1 14.7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>n.a.</td><td></td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td></td><td>Coffee</td><td>14.2</td><td>Cotton Coffee</td><td>14.8 12.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>n.a. n.a. n.a.</td><td></td><td>n.a. Total</td><td>51.0</td><td>Total</td><td>70.6</td></tr><tr><td>Nyasaland</td><td>n.a. Coffee</td><td>76.9</td><td></td><td>n.a. 29.0</td><td></td><td>71.9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Rubber</td><td>17.5</td><td>Cotton Tobacco</td><td>21.6</td><td>Tobacco</td><td>Tobacco 18.6</td><td>47.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Cotton I&#x27;ea</td><td></td><td>Tea Cotton</td><td>34.4 15.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ivory Total</td><td>2.9</td><td>Coffee</td><td>11.1 61.7</td><td></td><td>5.2 Total</td><td>97.8</td></tr><tr><td>N. Rhodesia&quot;</td><td></td><td>97.3</td><td>Total</td><td></td><td>Total</td><td>96.2</td><td>87.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copper Cattle</td><td>43.6 23.3</td><td>Lead Cattle</td><td>57.8 Copper 13.3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>Zinc</td><td>3.9</td></tr><tr><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a. n.a.</td><td>Maize Total</td><td>5.1 72.0</td><td>Tobacco Total</td><td>9.2 Cobalt 80.3 Total</td><td>3.4 94.6</td></tr></table>

ble 8.9 (continu
<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td colspan="2">1899-1901*</td><td colspan="2">1909-11</td><td colspan="2">19213</td><td colspan="2">19348</td></tr><tr><td>Mauritius</td><td>Sugar</td><td>92.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>96.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>99.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>97.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>2.2</td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>0.2</td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>0.2</td><td>Aloe fibre</td><td>0.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Molasses</td><td>1.0</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Rum</td><td>0.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>95.3</td><td>Total</td><td>97.7</td><td>Total</td><td>99.3</td><td>Total</td><td>98.2</td></tr><tr><td>Ceylon</td><td>Tea</td><td>54.6</td><td>Tea</td><td>51.6</td><td>Tea</td><td>50.8</td><td>Tea</td><td>61.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Plumbago</td><td>14.8</td><td>Rubber</td><td>11.6</td><td>Rubber</td><td>20.9</td><td>Rubber</td><td>20.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Copra</td><td>4.2</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>9.2</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>8.6</td><td>Coconut oil</td><td>5.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>73.6</td><td>Iotal</td><td>72.4</td><td>Total</td><td>80.3</td><td>Total</td><td>86.9</td></tr><tr><td>Malaya&quot;</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Tin</td><td>62.3</td><td>Rubber</td><td>56.0</td><td>Rubber</td><td>48.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>ti.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Rubber</td><td>31.8</td><td>Tin</td><td>45.4</td><td>Tin</td><td>28.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copra</td><td>1.1</td><td>Copra</td><td>5.4</td><td>Copra</td><td>3.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Total</td><td>95.2</td><td>Total</td><td>96.8</td><td>Total</td><td>79.8</td></tr><tr><td>Fiji</td><td>n.d.</td><td>t.a.</td><td>Sugar</td><td>64.5</td><td>Sugar</td><td>75.2</td><td>Sugar</td><td>73.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.d.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Copra</td><td>23.6</td><td>Copra</td><td>18.8</td><td>Copra</td><td>16.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Bananas</td><td>9.2</td><td>Bananas</td><td>3.7</td><td>Bananas</td><td>4.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>Total</td><td>97.3</td><td>Total</td><td>97.7</td><td>Total</td><td>94.6</td></tr><tr><td>Barbardos</td><td>Sugar</td><td>59.6</td><td>Molasses</td><td>48.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>58.5.</td><td>Sugar</td><td>54.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Molasses</td><td>15.5</td><td>Sugar</td><td>40.5</td><td>Molasses</td><td>36.4</td><td>Molasses</td><td>43.4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Fish</td><td>2.5</td><td>Colton</td><td>5.8</td><td>Cotton</td><td>1.6</td><td>Rum</td><td>0.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>77.6</td><td>Total</td><td>95.2</td><td>&#x27;I&#x27;otal</td><td>96.5</td><td>Total</td><td>98.1</td></tr><tr><td>Jamaica&#x27;</td><td>Bananas</td><td>37.4</td><td>Bananas</td><td>38.9</td><td>Bananas</td><td>47.7</td><td>Bananas</td><td>56.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sugar</td><td>9.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>8.1</td><td>Sugar</td><td>18.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>17.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Coffee</td><td>8.3</td><td>Rum</td><td>5.9</td><td>Coffee</td><td>5.3</td><td>Rum</td><td>4.9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>54.8</td><td>Total</td><td>52.9</td><td>&#x27;I&#x27;otal</td><td>71.7</td><td>Total</td><td>78.1</td></tr><tr><td>Trinidad</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>38.9</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>54.2</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>29.9</td><td>Petroleum</td><td>57.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sugar</td><td>23.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>28.3</td><td>Sugar</td><td>31.7</td><td>Sugar</td><td>21.8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Asphalt</td><td>6.7</td><td>Asphalt</td><td>8.2</td><td>Petroleum</td><td>12.5</td><td>Cocoa</td><td>10.0</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>69.3</td><td>Total</td><td>90.7</td><td>Total</td><td>74.1</td><td>Total</td><td>89.1</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td>Colony</td><td>1899-1901</td><td></td><td>1909-11</td><td></td><td>1921-3</td><td></td><td>19348</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">British Guiana</td><td>Sugar</td><td>72.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>66.9</td><td>Sugar</td><td>59.4</td><td>Sugar</td><td>65.2</td></tr><tr><td>Rum</td><td>14.8</td><td>Gold</td><td>11.4</td><td>Diamonds</td><td>22.7</td><td>Bauxite</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td>Cocoa</td><td>2.1</td><td>Gum</td><td>6.9</td><td>Gum</td><td>4.8</td><td>Rice</td><td>6.1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>87.8</td><td>Total</td><td>75.2</td><td>Total</td><td>86.9</td><td>Total</td><td>82.1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="10">British Honduras</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td>Lumber</td><td>59.6</td><td>Lumber</td><td>39.2</td><td>Lumber</td><td>54.6</td><td>Lumber</td><td>51.8</td></tr><tr><td>Bananas</td><td>9.1</td><td>Chicle Gum</td><td>22.1</td><td>Chidle Gum</td><td>12.8</td><td>Bananas</td><td>16.8</td></tr><tr><td>Coconuts Total</td><td>3.0 71.7</td><td>Coconuts Total</td><td>10.7 72.0</td><td>Bananas Total</td><td>9.4 76.8</td><td>Chicle Gum Total</td><td>16.3 84.9</td></tr><tr><td colspan="10"> </td></tr><tr><td colspan="10">1900-2. Source: Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, No. 51, (18991913), No. 58 (19225), No. 68 (192938).</td></tr></table>
