> 来源：Principles of Gestalt Psychology (Kurt Koffka)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Principles of Gestalt Psychology (Kurt Koffka)\Principles of Gestalt Psychology (Kurt Koffka).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# CHAPTER XII

# LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS I

Definition of Learning. Lcarning as Accomplishment and as Process. The Positions of Lashley and Humphrey. Learning as Process. When Does It Take Place?. Learning and Traces. Learning and Repetition. Three Problems Ipvoived in Learning. Learning Defined by Process. Consolidation of Traces. Availability of Traces. Formation of Traces. The New Process. The After-cffect of Traces. Acquisition of Skills. Associative Learning. The Doctrine of Associationism. Theory of Rotc Learning. Summary: Arbitrary Connections Replaced by Dynamic Organizations. Association as a Force. Lewin. Other Types of "Associative Learning." The General Field-Infuence Exerted by a Trace upon a Process

## DEFINITION OF LEARNING

In our last chapter we developed a theory of "memorial fields," i.e., we tried to establish certain principles which explain why the psychophysical field at any one moment is affected by events which occurred in the past. We shall now test our trace theory by examining what light it sheds on those processes which evidently depend upon previous experience. In common parlance the term learning is used to denote this problem. For a long time learned activities were sharply distinguished from original or inherited ones, and a number of theories were proposed to explain this difference and with it the nature of learning.Lashley distinguishes fivc major types of such theories, some of them including several special modifications, and finds none of them acceptable in view of the established facts (1929 a, pp. 556 f.). It will not be necessary to repeat the criticism of these theories after Lashley's trenchant and lucid discussion, which was preceded and followed by other attacks (e.g. Koffka, 1928, and Tolman). Instead we shall discuss the meaning of the term learning in order to have a safe basis for our own theory.

"Learning amounts to a change or modification of behaviour" (Woodworth, p. 163), or more fuly: "In general, however, we may say that learning is taking place wherever behaviour shows a progressive change or trend, with a repetition of the same stimulating situation and where the change cannot be accounted for on the basis of fatigue or of receptor and effector changes" (Hunter, p. 564). Humphrey, t quote lasty from this uthor, clais that modifcatioo r t y n o fc

## LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

, terion of learning. "Where there is learning the later actions of the series ordinarily differ from the earlier ones in the direction of the organism's advantage." And: "In order then to exhibit learning, a series of organic actions must first of all be such that later terms presupposc earlier ones, which is the same thing as to say that modification has taken place; but in addition the series will generally show a general approximation to an optimal term, optimal, that is to say, from the point of view of systemic conservation" (p. 105).

## LEARNING AS ACCOMPLISHMENT AND AS PROCESS. THE POSITIONS

## OF LASHLEY AND HUMPHREY

All three authors, and the last most clearly and consciously, define learning as an accomplishment and not as a process or performance. Thus by their definition thcy raisc the problem as to the nature of the process or processes which account for this accomplishment, a problem which Lashley formulates in thcse terms: . . . we are justified in raising the question whether the concept of learning or of memory embraces a unitary process which can be studied as a single problem, or whether it may not instead cover a great varicty of phenomena having no common organic basis" (p. 525). Humphrey, on the other hand, intends to find such a common principle in all learning accomplishments. We have seen in Chapter X that he rejects any theory of learning which introduces a specific new factor differcnt from those that explain other types of behaviour. His positive thesis is that learning can be explained as an integrated reaction, intcgrated not only in space but also in time. ". . . it may be repeatcd that starting from the conception of the organism as rcacting or adjusting to a single stimulus or situation, learning must be considered as the process of making an adjustment or total reaction to a total serics of such stimuli or situations. It is essentially similar to the proccss familiar as the act of responding to a situation by means of an integrative process. It involves no new principle, but mcrely the extension of onc already known"(p. 104). "All integration is four dimensional, it is interation of organic processes, events, corresponding to external changes that are four dimensional also. . . . If, then, we regard the act of 'associative memory' not in itsclf but togethcr with the preceding acts that go to form the total rclevant series, we have a unified total Response to a four-dimensional Situation, requiring fourdimensional integration of neural impulses" (p. 117). "Köhler's chimpanzee connected into a unity two sticks and the banana which were simultaneously presented in space. The animal's reaction is to the total spatio-temporal situation including these three specific elements, which the creative, integrative activity of the animal has interrelated. In the same way the animal learning by repetition effects a similar creative integration involving the similar elements in the repeated situation" (pp. 119-20). "Learning has been defined as the act of adjustment to a complex repeutive situation" (p. 124). The difference between Lashley and Humphrey is more apparent than real. It hinges on the term "common organic basis." If this is to mean that special "mechanism" involved in different acts of learning, Humphrey would agree thoroughly with Lashley; but by his unitary theory of learning he means a community of principle or law, which under different conditions, i.e., for different performances and in different individuals and species, may lead to very different actual occurrences, but as such is nevertheless the same in all of them. And this, Lashley in his turn might easily accept.

Criticism of Humphrey. As previously stated I am in full accord with Humphrey in his attempt at explaining learning. or memory, without the introduction of a spccial faculty. But his solution, as presented in the preceding quotations, seems to me at least incomplete. I am not certain whcther I understand Humphrey correctly; therefore the following critical remarks, although aimed at him, may not strike him; even so thcy would not be cntirely lost inasmuch as they deal with a position which it is tempting to take.

FouR-DIMENsIoNAL ORGANIzATIoN. We have argucd ourselves (in Chapter X) that reality cannot be treated in terms of space alone, that the time dimension must necessarily be included. From this insight it is easy to pass on to a theory in which the four-dimensional space-time continuum plays the same róle which the three-dunensional space continuum plays in spatial organization, a rôle in which all four dimensions are absolutely equivalent. Such a theory, if it .were tenable, would solve many of our problems much more directly and simply. We might, e.g., consider a one-dimcnsional structure in this four-dimensional continuum different from a point, like a melody. And then we could say that the melody was organized in the time dimension just as a curve is organized in space-dimensions. I resisted this temptation in thc case of the mclody, and other temporal units, because it seemed to me to be no more than a formal analogy devoid of a concrete dynamical meaning. Since I shall now criticize Humphrey's application of a similar conception to learning I shall omit a detailed discussion of my refusal to treat time units in this manner. Moreover, several of my reasons are implicitly contained in my earlier arguments. My criticism of Humphrey starts from his concept of the total four-dimensional situation to which there is a total and unified response. The quotation from page 105 given on page 53o continues: "Because the series consists of related terms it is a unity." I find both terms, "total situation" and "fourdimensionally integrated reaction," inadequate not because they are intrinsically bad, but because without further elaboration they are not concrete enough. How is the "total situation" to be defined? We saw the difficulty inherent in this concept when it is used in a purely spatial connotation (see Chapter IV, pp. 158 f.). How much more difficult does it become when the time dimension is included! Without modification the "total situation" is the whole spatiotemporal life history of the person. But no process is explained if it is referred to this practically infinite mass of events. Humphrey, very appropriately, speaks of repetitions of a stimulus situation which form a total situation in their entirety, i.e., he specifies "total situations" so as to mean something different for each special occasion. If I learn to type, the former occasions on which I practise, together t et     I   e  y etc. Therefore, the specific total situation cannot simply be taken for granted; instead we must explain why certain past events and not others join with the present occasion to form a total situation. Tec -snal se-l in the solution of this problem. The same conclusion arises from a difent startig point. Not all ojects "ear," although theyll occur and behave in the four-dimensional continuum. A billiard ball is "as good" when it is brand new as after it has been used for years, because it is so elastic that it regains its original shape after each deformation produced by cue or cannoning ball. For the billiard ball e past  not exit.Teo, e whic av memoy, be they pieccs of wire or human organisms, must be different from billard balls, i te sense that theynever regain theiold status completely, once they have been affected. We called the change which cannot be completely annihlated in bjects with memory, a trace. By means of this concept, finally, we were able to overcome another difficulty inherent in Humphrey's four-dimensional total siain: the difficulty, namely, how the past can affect the present (eeChapter X, p.42), a dificulty which seems to me not solved by the mere reference to space-time.

Let us now turn to the second term, the unity of the learning scries, the four-dimensionally integrated reaction. While our attitude to the first, the four-dimensional total situation, was to consider it incomplete without the assumption of traces and a principle of selection, our attitude to the second must be somewhat different. The term applies very well to melodics and other temporal units. But does it apply in the same way to the progressive learning series? Humphrey, although he has not discussed the example of the melody, has seen this difficulty. He compares an ordinary purposive activity with learning activities and claims that they are essentially similar in nature. "The fact that learning ordinarily implies an intermittent series of actions, thc animal being put into the maze three times a day, for example, while in the interval it is in its cage, does not constitute an essential difference between the purposive and the learned activity. For many 'purposes' are interrupted in the same way" (p. 127). Now one may well admit that interruptions qua interruptions do not constitute an essential difference between the two kinds of activities and yet may withhold assent to the statement that therefore the two activities are essentially similar. For a purposive activity or a melody completed after an interruption is still one and the same action or melody. The dynamic situation is such that the completion is demanded and that the interruption has the function of an obstacle. But the repetition of a purposive action or of a melody is not the same action or mclody as the first; there need be nothing in the dynamic situation that demands repetition. The second occurrence, besides being numerically different, will also in many cases be qualitatively different—that is what we call learning, and that is what we want to explain. To call the first and the second event together a total reaction seems to me neither to be correct nor to supply that explanation. It is not correct in the sense in which one action or melody is a total reaction, for in thesc all parts demand and support each other in one continuous process, or if the purposive act is interruptcd bcfore completion, at least in one directed tension. Particularly in the melody the end requires the middle and the beginning and derives its meaning from them, while in the repetitions of one and the same event no such relation necessarily holds. If, for instance, a person could execute a perfect tennis stroke would be superfluous. A perfect stroke is a perfect stroke and no different whether it is executed after much or little practice. Furthermore, often enough the repetition occurs undemanded by the earlier occasions. That means: the later process, which derives some o i carterstics fom te earlr one, otn requires te c rence of some event in the geographical environment that is con-

## 534 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

tingent or adventitious with regard to the previous events. These previous events are over and done with, they contain in themselves no factor that can produce an occasion for the renewed occurrence of a similar event. A very simple example: a person comes for the first time in his life to a place where there is heavy snow. He will find walking through the slippery streets a very difficult task. If the snow stays on the ground, he will gradually become more surefooted, but his action of walking on it is over when he has reached his destination, and whether the snow stays or goes or whether a new blizzard presents him with new opportunities for "practising" has nothing to do with his accomplishment. This contingency of the occasions that are necessary for the repetition of the processes again makes it impossible for me to accept the sum of the subsequent repetitions as one total response.

Learning as Process. When Does It Take Place? This criticism of some of Humphrcy's concepts does not, however, imply that we disagree with him in his general position that learning must be explained without the introduction of a new specific principle. To see this, and thereby how close our position is to Humphrey's, we shall analyze some learning activitics raising the question when in these activities learning takes place. Since the greater part of learning occurs without the intention to lcarn, we shall choose cases of this kind. They include all animal learning, for an animal in its trials runs for food or to escape punishment, or to explore, or for some other reasons, but certainly not in ordcr to learn. The same is true of many human activitics, such as the one last discussed, the improvement of a pcrson's ability to walk on slippery streets, and also of the acquisition of language by an infant, or the "learning of the lesson of experience" in the social situations of the adult; here the behaviour is directed towards good and tactful conduct, and again not towards learning.

But let us start from a simple example. How does the stranger from a more clement climate learn to walk safely over frozen ground? Let us, for simplicity's sake, assume that already on the second occasion he is morc skilful. Is this second performance the learning? Certainly not; it is, as everyone will agree, a learned activity to the extent that it is dependent upon the first. Then the first performance must be the learning activity, and yet it had nothing to do with learning qua learning, but served only the purpose of going from one place to another. As such, then, it has no claim to be called a learning activity, whereas viewed retrospectively from the improved second performance it must be so called. What is true of the first holds equally for the second, for a third performance would show a new improvement, and so forth.

Learning and Traces. This case is typical, and it shows that any activity might be called a learning activity, provided it fulfilled some special conditions which we shall state later. This proposition might look like a purcly verbal solution of a real problem, but this is not its intent. We can show in what respect, or why, an activity is a learning activity. Supposing that the organism, after a process had occurred in its psychophysical field, returned completely to its old state, like the billiard ball of our previous discussion. Then each process occurring on repeatcd occasions would be similar to the first process, differing from it only inasmuch as the external conditions, or the desires and interests of the organism, were different. But the former performances could not be responsible for improvement in the later oncs: the same system exposed to the same forces for a number of times must react each time in exactly the same manner. As a response to the set of external and internal conditions the first response is thus not a learning response, for it might be the same as it is now if the organism were totally "clastic," i.e., if it re-instated its old condition completely after the pcrformance is past. But we know that the organism is not of this kind; it cannot return to its old state because the process itself effects a permanent change in it, the trace. Such a changed organism, if exposed a second time to the same stimulus situation, must, qua diferent organism, behave differently the second time from what it did the first time. Therefore the first performance, inasmuch as it leaves a trace, is a learning process, provided we use modification of behaviour as synonymous with learning, a usage which Humphrey has criticized for good reasons, reserving the term learning for such modifications as show "improvement." Improvement looks like a purely pragmatic criterion. Although I agrec with Humphrey that it is not, but points to a much more essential feature of the modification, I shall leave this point open for the moment. At present it is sufficient to point out that the process by leaving a trace must modify later processes in some respects, improvement being but one of the possibilities. But all possibilities of modification, whether we dub them learning or not, must be derivable from the same principle, the special kind of modification depending upon the particular nature of the case in a manner to be discussed presently.

Our Theory Consistent with Humphrey's Main Principle. But first it will be worth our while to consider how far we have lived up to Humphrey's principle that no new factor is to be introduced to

## 536 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

explain learning. The result of such reflection must be that we have not violated this postulate. We included in our explanation nothing but the process itself with its effect on the organism, called a trace. This is no new assumption. It is not self-evident that a process should leave no trace, and therefore the assumption of such a trace is not the introduction of a new factor. The organism is in this respect similar to many inorganic systems. Therefore, if we use the term in the widest possible sense, it is perfectly correct to say that every process is ,in some respect a learning process.

Learning and Repetition. This wide use of the term has, however, its disadvantages. To quote again from Humphrey: "A burnt child that used its experience in order to acquire deftness in plunging its hands into the flames would be a candidate for an institution" (p. 105). To give a different example: repetition may lead to bad habits as well as to good ones; thus it is very difficult to learn to pronounce a word correctly once one has acquired the habit of pronouncing it incorrectly, a fact I know well from my own experience.1 The. same is true in acquiring a motor skill, be it the proper stroke at tennis, the position of the body in skiing, or anything ee. One may easily start "wrong" and then acquire bad habits which will prevent one from really "learning" the desired activity. In such cases practice does not lead to an "optimum," regarded from the point of view of adjustment to the specific situation, even though the modifications produccd by such bad practice may have a direction towards a final term. And so we can now resume the question which we held in abeyance as to thc causcs which dctermine the rôle of practice or repetition; whether it leads to real learning in Humphrey's sense, to bad habits, or has no effect at all. An example for this last case is taken from Köhler's anthropoid work. The reader may remember that one of the problems set to the apes required the stacking of boxes for the attainment of the goal. This activity became a real pastime for the animals, which practised it continually over a long pcriod, with the striking result that they showed no improvement whatever. Their stacking was, at the end as at the beginning, a mere piling of one box on top of one or two others wiout y regard o e stability o e structure acived.Ony because of their great skill and uncanny bodily balance were they able to reach the suspended fruit before the shaky edifice on which they stood collapsed. Köhler's film and to some extent the pictures in his book show the nature of this performance which will raise the hair of the spectator. Why, however, was there no improvement? Why did the traces of the previous performances not influence the execution of the later ones so as to make them progressively better and better? Why, otherwise expressed, was the practice of the apes in box stacking so different in its effects from the practice of a human pupil in a typewriting school?

Repetition of Accomplishment and Repetition of Process. No ex planation can be given as long as one thinks of these activities in terms of accomplishment. If one activity improves through practice while another one does not, the reason must be that the traces are different in the two kinds of practice in such a way that this difference accounts for the difference in the effect of practice. This does not mean that the traces of the two accomplishments, typing and box stacking, are thus different; for one could think of conditions under which practice with the typewriter causes no gain in typing ability—e.g., when a child plays with it before he can read or write-and conversely box stacking by human beings may very well be improved by practice. Thcrefore the processes which produce the traces must be different in two activities which show such different efects of practice, no matter whether these processes correspond to the same or to different accomplishments. In the case of the apes, box stacking was merely the action of getting one on top of the other; the aspect of doing this in a mechanically stable way, involving definite spatial relationships of the top of the lower and the bottom of the higher box, was totally absent from their behaviour, i.e., from the processes which actually occurred in their psychophysical feld, and therefore also from the traces which these processes left behind. But the trace field as a remnant of a process distribution has nothing in it to influence a new process occurring under similar stimulus conditions that would make the process distribute itself in a direction different from the one to which it owes its existence. Rather, the ordinary facts of practice prove that repetition of activity A will create an aggregated trace system of such a kind that activity A will become more stable and regulr and thereby exclude variation into a very different activity B. Applied to the box stacking this means that improvement of this performance can occur in the direction of greater stability of the structures created only when at one stage in the series of building activities the process itself has something to do with this stability o that the trace eft by it can ince tefollowing perforanc. Generally speking  -

## 538 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

complishment X involves the aspects A, B, C . . . , then improvement can occur only in those aspects which were, in however low a degree, also represented in the process and were thereby left in the trace system. Since every accomplishment is of this type, repetition can lead to improvement only to the extent to which the partial aspects are present in performances. If, in accomplishing X, I have not performed A, although I have accomplished it, this performance will have no practice effect for the future accomplishment of A, however much practice effect it may have on other aspects of X which were part of my actual performance.

Repetition of Occasion. Its Two Functions. Consequently repetition of the same accomplishment may have very different efects if during this series an aspect A occurs for the first time. Before this occurrence repetition can have no effect for A; afterwards it can. Repetition of the occasion, therefore, has a double function for learning. On the one hand it gives a number of opportunities for the particular process to occur for the first timc. Up to that point it has no influence on later performances of this process. On the other hand, once the particular proccss has occurred each repetition will add to the particular trace system or aggregate and thereby exert an influence on latcr performances. Since repetitions have thus a differcnt function before and after a critical occasion the mere counting of repetitions per se does not seem to be valuable for a better understanding of the learning process unlcss the cxperimenter knows bcforehand that the proccss in the development of which he is interestcd occurred at the first repetition. Thcrefore, much experimental work on memory possesses less significance than hus been attributed to it.

RepeTITion of ProcesS And TOlman'S POsition: THe LaW oF Frequencr. According to our theory repctition affects learning directly only qua repetition of the process. This scems at first sight to be in contradiction to Tolman's position, although a closer inspection seems to me to reveal that the two positions are more or less identical. Tolman distinguishes bctween two meanings of the law of frequency, one of which he considers corrcct; the other, the one usually givcn to it, he shows to be contradicted by the facts. "The Law of Exercise . . . holds, we shall assert, when that which is meant by exercise is frequent and recent repetition of the whole stimulus situation, irrespective of whether in the given trial the animal chooses a correct or an incorrcct path. Exercise in this sense means the frequency and recency with which the whole problem, as a problem, is met and responded to" (p. 346). "In the second meaning of the Law of Exercise . . . what is meant by frequent and recent exercise seems to be frequent and recent 'differential' exercise upon the correct path at the expense of the incorrect paths" (p. 347). These statements might be read so as to contain a theory the direct opposite of the one here presented. Tolman's true law seems to treat repetition as repetition of an accomplishment, the false as that of a performance and process, whereas in our theory the rôles were exactly reversed. But as already pointed out, this impression would be erroneous. From Tolman's apt and trenchant refutation of the false interpretation it appcars that in this form of the theory repetition really means accomplishment, and from the later statement of his own law, that the first interpretation rcally refcrs to performance or process. It is hardly\_ necessary to devote much space to the interpretation rejected by Tolman, since its main supporter, Thorndike, has repudiated it himself on jccount of his own extended experiments. I shall only demonstrate by one example why Tolman's criticism can be translatcd into the terms: accomplishment vs. process. If an animal learns to run through the correct path because all blind alleys are blocked, then his process of running through thcse correct paths leads to the same accomplishmcnt as that of an animal which makes a perfect run after having learned the maze with the blinds unobstructed, but qua process it is totally different. To run through the only open path is different from running over a path which at various points forks in two or more directions so as to necessitate a choice. Only when choice can occur during the lcarning will the performance have the "choice" character, otherwise it will not, and therefore an animal which has been trained with entrances of culs-de-sac blocked has not learned "the maze"; i.e., it will commit errors as soon as the blocks are removed. Tolman reproduces a quotation from Carr, from whose work this example is taken. With thc omission of the first sentence this quotation follows: c6 . . a certain number of errors must bc made and eliminated bcfore the subject is ever able to run the maze correctly. Correct modes of response are cstablished in part by learning what not to do."

LEARNinG wHaT NoT To Do. Carr's highly instructive results offer a convincing argument against a wrong interpretation of the rôle of repetition. But Carr's words as just quoted do not do full justice to this significancc, because Carr speaks in terms of accomplishment and not of performance. It is perfectly true to say, as hc does, that in order to learn what to do we must also lcarn what not to $\mathbf { d o } ,$ but this statement, referring as it does to accomplishments, must be translated into terms of performance or process. Let us try to do tempt, discover easily enough for himself whether God needs memory or for which of his functions he needs it.

The Circular Relation Between Process and Trace as the Cause of Mental Development. We shall stay on this earth, and there new proccsses occur in systems already endowed with traces; it is this fact alone that makes mental development intelligible. For by occurring in trace-endowed systems processes will be influenced by these traces, and the novelty of a process itself may in a large measure be duc to the traces. Such a new process leaves a new trace in its wake, which in its turn may contribute to the arousal of another new process which without it could not have arisen. Thus by processes making traces, and traces processes, the system is bound to devclop if for the moment we mein by development the production of ever ncw processes. It is obvious that development in this sense depends entircly on the effects that traces can exert on later proccsses, i.c., on the solution of our problem (3).

Associationism and the Problem of Achievement. Traditional empiricism, which in the preccding chapters I so frequently made the butt of my criticism, hus been thc failure I consider it to be because it never recognized the full import of this problem. And this lack of insight is closely related to its complete elimination of the first problem, our problem of achievemcnt. Empiricism has been based on two basic concepts: sensation and association. The first of these two h.s becn criticized in an earlier chapter (Chapter III, p. 103 f.); the second one rcquircs a fcw words of comment. I shall forbear to o into the long history of associationism. Suffce it to say that in this history the concept, while becoming more and more sharply defined, was at the same time narrowed down to one and only one type of relation. Whercas originally several kinds of association had been distinguished, viz, association by contiguity, by similarity, and by contrast, only the first survivcd in the process of devclopment, reaching its climax in the concept of the conditioned reflex. Association by contiguity established a purely existential and external relation bctween any two events that happen to occur in spatial or temporal neighbourhood. The associative bond between the two items A and B is, according to strict associationism, due exclusively to their occurring together and is quite independent of the intrinsic characteristics of A and B. Radical associationism will even expluin the differcnces betwecn A and B, apart from differences in sensory content-blue, rcd, loud, sweet, etc.-—by association: since association obtains as a rule not between "simple sensations"-a concept which was a crux in every associationistic system—but between perceived objects, these objects were themselves explained as complexes of sensations held together by particularly strong associative bonds. Thus associationists were by the very extension of their fundamental assumption prevented from ascribing any importance to the intrinsic qualities of the associated items, all such items differing from each other merely in associative combination and the sense qualities of their elementary constituents. Associationism was therefore bound to react violently against gcstalt theory, which, as we demonstrated in the prcceding chapters, has a vcry definite and important place for real intrinsic differenccs betwecn behavioural objects, intrinsic differences which are not reducible to association. The most detailed and impassioned associationistic attack against gestalt theory came from G. E. Muller, who published a spccial monograph against it (1923). Since Köhler (1925a) replied extensively to this attack, showing the inconsistencies of Muller's arguments and the ad hoc hypotheses which again and again he had to attach to his old system in ordcr to dcal with facts dliscovcred by gestalt theorists, I need not pursue this matter any further.

The one important point for us to note about associationism is that it knows only one kind of connection or interaction between elements, that of association. Whercver parts of a larger whole are found to hang together in some way or other, such communication is describcd and treated as association, a purely external and existential bond. Thus the members of a learned serics of nonsense syllables are not only associated one with the other—in various degrees, according to proximity and other factors—but also with the place they occupy in the total serics, which in persons with imaginal diagrams likc number-forms mcans association with a spatial locus, just as a quotation, whose position on the page we remembcr, is in this view associated with the particular part of the page. Similarly, if we scc a square and not four lines, it is because these four lines have become associated, and so forth.

Such a theory can know no real problem of achievcment. The new process which is to be learned, i.e., strengthened by repetition, is always a process of association, and since its one cause was considered to be contiguity, no problem cven arose as to what produced such a new association. As far as I know, associationism, which based its theory on experiments of the rote learning type, has never felt the necd to tackle this problem. A new situation for associationism arose, howevcr, when the experimental base was changed. We gain a new point of view for evaluating the achicvement of Thorndikc's first animal experiments when we compare them with the

## LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

experiments invented, refined, and almost endlessly repeated in Germany. For in Thorndike's experiments an animal has truly to learn something new which is not presented to it readymade as the nonsense syllables are to the human subject. Therefore something like our problem of achievement arose; how does the animal arrive at the correct response for the first time? But Thorndike's associationism prevented him from seeing the real significance of this problem, because he never doubted that associationism, or "connectionism"— an even more rigid form of the same general way of thinking—was the only way of explaining it. And so he invented his principle of multiple response, in which all responses that the animal can make in any situation are lying ready within the animal as inherited reflex connections. I have discussed Thorndike's thcories in another book (28 pp. 130, 138, 180 f.), and therefore refrain from repeating my argument. Against its critical tendency I want here to emphasize the great potential gain which psychology derived from the change of method introduccd by Thorndike, a change of method which has prepared the way for the recognition of the true problem and has tremendously broadened the discussion of the problem of learning by the introduction of thc much debated law of success which we shall discuss later.

## LEARNING DEFINED BY PROCESS

Let us briefly summarize what we have gained, by giving a new explanatory definition of learning. Learning, as the modification of an accomplishment in a certain direction, consists in creating trace systems of a particular kind, in consolidating them, and in making them more and more available both in repeated and in new situations. This describes learning because available traces modify new processes and thereby achieve modification of behaviour and accomplishment.

Consolidation of Traces. Little nced be said about the consolidation of traces, for we have discussed in various parts of our last chapter a number of causes which counteract consolidation. We may summarize these discussions in our present context by saying that consolidation will be achieved by stable articulate organization. Inarticulate organization, mere aggregation, is detrimental to consolidation, as von Restorff has shown, and similarly traces of chaotic processes are unstable. Articulate organization has two aspects. In the first place the individual trace may be more or less articulate, in the second the trace may be a more or less articulate and significant par invel r ra sts. Tu petin my py a third rôle which we have not yet discussed. If the same process occurs repeatedly in different contexts it may gain stability by the place it assumes in the trace systems of each of these contexts.

The rules which we have laid down for consolidation are not mere empirical rules but follow directly from our laws of organization. We know that segregation and unification require inhomogeneity and vary directly with the degree of inhomogeneity. In "aggregates" each trace finds itself in a quasi-homogeneous environment and must for that reason lack stability. Conversely, an "isolated" trace is a region of inhomogeneity, and for that reason stable. But we saw that degree of inhomogcneity is by no means the only factor determining organization. We found besides such factors as good continuation and closure. If we apply these to traces we are led to our rule that articulate organization favours stability. For a trace which forms a "good" part of a larger system is maintained by the forces of the whole system, while one that does not conform to the pattern of the whole will be exposed to forces within this whole which tend to change it.

A New Double Rôle of Repetition: A Paradox. Yct this cannot be enough. Rcpetition is without a doubt, to a ccrtain extent and under definite conditions, a vcry powerful factor in stabilizing traces. This fact introduces into our theory a sort of paradox which we shall have to solve. For we saw that repetition cannot mean the strengthening of one trace but the building up of a trace system composed of as many members as there are repetitions. Thus we obtain necessarily an aggregate of traces which should interfere with consolidation. This seems paradoxical in view of the beneficial rôle which repetition plays in all learning, but in reality it is not. For the effect which we have just derived from our theory, interference with the stability of a trace by repctition of a process, actually occurs. There is loss of consolidation of the single individual traces which we are apt to overlook because it is accompanied by a gain in the stability of the trace system. When we learn to type, the individual lessons will soon be forgotten, and the clumsy movements which we originally executed will at a later stage be impossible; i.e., the traces of the first lessons have become changed by the aggregate of traces which has been produccd by the many repetitions and is responsible for the improvement of the skill. Similarly, when we stay in a room for any length of time, we get a great number of impressions of it by moving about or merely lctting our eyes roany. But only a few of them can be recalled. It is needless to give more examples. It is quite generally confirmed that repetition interferes with the in-

## 546 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

dividual traces, just as von Restorff's theory demands. At the same time, however, the trace system becomes more and more fixed, it acquires a greater and greater influence on future processes. It is thcreforc at least a plausible hypothesis to assume that the extension of the trace system is one of the factors which determine its efficacy, an extension which is steadily increased with each new repetition. Perhaps this conclusion should be correlated with Lashley's discovery that the extent to which behaviour detcriorates through brain injury is a direct function of the amount of tissue destroyed. Be this as it may, our paradox has bcen solved; we understand now how repetition can be beneficial to lcarning despite its destructive influence on individual traces.

Availability of Traces. Our discussion of the aspect of learning which concerns the availability of traces can be equally short. At the end of the last chapter we have said all we can say about the causes of availability. The applications to the learning proccss are too obvious to require further elaboraton. Only one point may be added. In introducing the present topic wc distinguishcd availability for identical or very similar and for different and new situations.

THE TRANsFeR PROBLEM GENERALIzeD. The latter has a great deal to do with the transfer problem. The name transfer implies that psychologists considercd it as thc "normal" case that a trace should influence a similar process, and therefore gave the name of transfer to cases where performances of one kind excrted, through their traces, an influcnce on different performances not separately practised. But this mode of trcating the general problem, practical as it is for a number of special problems, does not seem to be entirely adequate to the fundamental problem of lcarning, if by learning we mean any influence exerted by a trace on a later pcrformance. Viewcd in this broad frame, the effect of a trace or a trace system on processcs similar to those which have produced them is but a special case, and to consider it as the normal may easily distort our view of the problems involved. For we do not rcally know of what kind this influence is. It has to be studied in the same way as any other influence. Methodologically it is most simple to investigate learning by repetition of process, and the greater bulk of the vast literature on learning has uscd this method. But it would be wrong to ascribe a special importance or unique significance to a special case merely because it is most amcnable to scientific treatment. A rat, to give an example, can be trained to go to the food box of a maze by being put into the entrance box in a hungry condition and being fed each time it reaches the food compartment. But experiments on so-called "latent learning," emphasized by Tolman (pp. 343 f.), have proved that a rat also learns the maze to a considerable extent if before the "critical runs," when it is hungry and finds food in the food chambers, it has been allowed to roam about the maze freely and explore it thoroughly. Here roaming around, following all sorts of different paths, has the effect that the "true" path is taken with far fewer errors than it would have been had the other activity not preceded the "critical" one. Cases like this demonstrate the inadequacy of the term transfer. If we callcd the cffect of the latent learning a transfer, then we ought to know," or assume, what the direct, non-transfer, effect of the exploring runs is. Does the animal in these experiments learn directly to follow a very special path, an acquisition which can be "transferred" to a new, the "true," path? Certainly not. The animals do not, in these experiments, become fixed to any particular pattern of alleys bcfore the critical runs begin. What they acquire is an orientation within thc maze, a sort of "plan" of the maze. This acquisition, which has a direct effect on the discovery of the true path, is in itsclf a case whcre traces of one kind of process, i.e., roaming about, gradually produce another process, i.e., knowing the layout of the maze.

Possible Conflict Between Two Kinds of Availability. Drill. How traces become more available for such new proccsses is a question we cannot yet even begin to answer. All we can say is that it must depend upon the nature of the trace and the new process. However, one conclusion seems fairly safe: conditions which make a trace more and more available for mere repetition of one process will often make it at the same time less available for other processes. Thus the educator should be very conscious of his aims when he decides whether to apply drill or not. Drill will no doubt make the traces more and morc available for one kind of activity, but it may at the same time narrow down the range of availability.

Formation of Traces. The "New" Process. We are then left with the first of the three efects found necessary for learning (sce p.4), the creation of the proper trace. Since traces are creatcd by processes, this leads us to a consideration of process itsclf with regard to learning. We said before that any process might be considercd as a learning process inasuch as ts repetitin would, qua repetition, be different from the first occurrence. Therefore, when in our present context we treat of the first arousals of processes, we must be as inclusive as possible. We are dealing here with the problem previously named the problem of achievement; but this name is apt to bias our attitude towards the problem; we think of processes not easily

## 548 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

aroused, achieved the first time with more or less difficulty, and by their very occurrence raising the intellectual level of the organism. But important as such cases are, they are not the only ones that must be considered now; we must include in our survey every new process, unconcerned with the degree of difficulty with which it is aroused. When we see an ink blot of a new shape, this perception is a new process; when we walk through a picture gallery and see new pictures, other new processes occur; again when we hear for the first time a new simple tune, or a complex piece of music. If we contrast with these cases the understanding of a mathematical proof or, even better, the discovery or invention of such a proof, we sce the enormous variety of processes, different in quality and in ease of arousal; at the same time we see that with regard to the second point the difference is a graded one. There are not only cases where the process is aroused at once by the forces of the proximal stimuli and others where a long and laborious effort is necessary to produce it; there are numberless intermediate cases, as exemplified by the complex piece of music which we understand better with each new repetition. All cases, however, have one aspect in common: at a definite moment in the life history of the organism a certain process must arise for the first time and leave a corresponding trace which remains as a condition for an unlimited numbcr of later processes. That this condition itself is not immutable we have discussed in the two preceding chapters, notably in our theory of forgetting. But the fact remains that potentially every new process may affect later processes through its trace, so that each process alters the organism, i.e. is a process of learning. Therefore our scientific attitude with regard to this accomplishment must of necessity be unduly limited if we view learning only as either rote learning or the acquisition of a motor skill or the gradually improved pcrformances in mazes or puzzle boxes. It is clear how emphasis on rote learning has lcd to the theory of associations, and how this theory in its turn has influenced the explanation of the other accomplishments first enumerated. If we free ourselves from the limitations imposed upon older theories by too narrow and one-sided a selection of empirical material, we shall gain a much broader view of the processes occurring in progressive learning.

"InNaTE" AnD "AcQuireD." At the same time the time-honoured distinction between innate and acquired processes gains a new aspect. As I have pointed out elsewhere (1932) it is wrong to speak of innate processes. What is innate is structure, structure which will carry processes only when special forces arouse them. Even the first processes, which occur when the organism has as yet no traces, cannot be called innate: they are the reactions of the traceless organism to a definite set of stimuli.

To stress this point may seem pedantic. Nobody can have meant anything else when he spoke of innate processes. But pedantry, as the making explicit of what previously had been at best implicit, may be very valuable by formulating the assumptions contained in a theory, so that one knows what they are and what they are not. In our case the formulation that structure is innate but processes are not, adds very definitely to the understanding of the naturenurture dichotomy. For it makcs it explicit that each process depends upon a set of conditions, of which the innate structure is one, the factual stimuli are another, and the laws of organization a third. That the second factor was extraneous to the dilemma of inherited vs. acquired would have been admitted by everyone, although it would not have appeared as a particularly important point. But that the third factor also lies entirely beyond this distinction has been overlooked for the mere fact that organization itself played no rôle in traditional systems of psychology. The result was that when gestalt psychologists introduced the concept of organization, other psychologists, accustomed to think in terms of innate and acquired, interpreted organization and its laws as something innate, thereby ascribing to gestalt theory a sort of psychological Kantian a priori. But as we have emphasized, the laws of organization fall entirely outside the scope of our dichotomy. The laws of electric potential, of surface tension, of maximum or minimum energy, hold for any system and are quite indcpendent of the particular system considered, much as the nature of those systems will determine the actual processes which follow from these universal laws. To call these laws innate is therefore nonsensical; for innate can only mean: dependent upon the particular nature of the system as it is on account of its biological origin.

SEVERaL KindS Of PROcEssEs. (a) DIrectLy sTiMuLus-CondITIOnED oNEs. We return to the processes themselves. Are we justified in including in our account of learning those which arise directly upon stimulation without pre-existing traces? If the stimuli alone can produce a certain process, how can the trace become effective when the stimuli are repeated; in other words, how in such cases can learning take place? This is really a quaestio facti: Does learning take place under these conditions, will repetition of the same stimuli produce the same process or not? The answer to this question cannot be in doubt: Learning does take place; the second ex-

## 550 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

perience is not, as a rule, exactly like the first. On the one hand the second experience is "familiar," it is being recognized, and as such it is different from the first. But at the same time it will also change qualitatively in some aspect of organization. This will even be true of the simplest possible process, the perception of, say, a white circle on a black background. All our knowledge of early stages of mental development indicates that the first process aroused by such stimulation will be far less sharp and defined than later processes; a vague circular blur will appear at first, where later a sharply bounded circle will be seen. The' normal environment of the newly born organism does not, of course, contain such simple stimuli. No such simple process, thereforc, can be arouscd, but again it is impossible to believe that the infant pcrceives the mothcr's face from the beginning in the same way as it does latcr. Generalizing, we must say that a trace left by a process must affect the process occurring with a repetition of the stimuli, even when the first process was directly and exclusively stimulus-determined.

(b) TRANSFORMATION OF ONE PROCESS INTO ANOTIER. The nAtURe of this influence of traces upon latcr processes will be discussed presently. At the moment we turn to the arousal of such processcs as do not stand in such a simplc rclation to thc stimulus. It is typical of these cases that a reaction $\mathbf { R } _ { 1 }$ to a stimulus complex S changes into the reaction $\bf { R _ { 2 } } ,$ and the qucstion arises: Why does this transformation take place? Now in a majority of occasions this change will occur through the introduction of ncw traces into the ficld of the process, so that the solution of our prcscnt problem will be dependent on our discussion of thc influcnces exerted by traccs on later processes, though over and above this problem it involves the other, of how the trace ficld becomes extended, and why in the particular way which brings about the new proccss $\mathtt { R } _ { 3 }$ .There are, however, other cases. The whole matcrial may be presented simultaneously or quasi-simultaneously, i.e., within thc scope of a temporal unit, and yet the proper process may not take place. $^ { \mathfrak { s o } } \mathbf { I }$ try to explain to my students a somewhat difficult dcmonstration of a mathematical theory, putting all my scntences togcther with the utmost care in the right sequence and with all possible clearncss. I shall probably not have much success in my first performance. Something remains dull in the faces of my audience." Some students may, however, "undcrstand" the argument, and others will understand it after one or more repetitions, which in this case serve chiefly to keep the "matcrial" present to their minds. Here a change takes place from processcs $\bar { \mathbf { R _ { 1 } } } ,$ all characterized by lack of understanding, to process $\mathbf { R _ { 2 } } ,$ the process by which the theory is understood. We shall discuss the reasons of this change in the next chapter, which will be devoted to the theory of thinking, and there we shall also discuss such accomplishments as those of Köhler's chimpanzees, which in some respects are similar to our last example, also taken from Köhler (1930, p. 57).

c)TRANsFoRMaTIoN BY EFFEcT. At the moment we must point out a third class of cases, those where the process is transformed during its own progress by its cffect. The puzzle box cxperiments introduced by Thorndike may serve as our example. In these experiments an animal by continued repetition learns to eliminate useless movements and to perform the "proper" one, i.c., that which will lead it to the lure. The question thcn is, what are the causes that transform its behaviour. The famous laws of frcquency, recency and effect were formulated to answer this qucstion. All three laws in their application to this problcm have of late years been discussed so often that I can omit the various arguments hcre, the more so since I have trcated this matter fully in my earlier book (1928, Chapter IV). Hcre I shall confine myself to a positive theory. Why does a cat in a cage, which originally manifests an extremely varied behaviour, eventually limit its activity to the turning of a latch or the pressing of a button? The question can be answered only in terms of process, not in terms of accomplishment. The fact that $\mathbf { R _ { 1 } } _ { 1 }$ $\mathbb { R } _ { 2 } \ldots .$ are dropped while process $\bar { \mathsf { R } } _ { \mathfrak { w } } \bar { \mathsf { e } } . \mathsf { g } .$ the pressing of a button, is preserved and perfcctcd, must be explained as a transformation of process. We rccall our discussion of muze-running (pp- 539 f.) and distinguish in conformity with it the accomplishment of pressing the button, $\mathbf { A } _ { \mathbf { n } } ,$ and the process of doing so, $\mathbf { \dot { P } _ { n } ^ { ' } } . \mathbf { A _ { n } }$ can be achieved by many $\mathbb { P } _ { \mathtt { N } }$ for instance, by stepping on the button accidentally while moving to another place within the cage, $\mathbf { P _ { n 1 } }$ . Since it played no part in the process, the button as such can contribute nothing to the proper $\dot { \mathbb { P } } _ { \mathfrak { n } } ,$ the deliberate pressing of the button. But it is possible that $\mathrm { { \cal P } } _ { n 1 }$ , by virtuc of leading to success, may bccome transformed into $\mathbf { l } _ { \mathbf { \Pi } ^ { \mathtt { s } } } ^ { }$ just as in the maze example discussed above the run through a blind alley may, by the fact that the animal finds itself blocked, be transformed into a detour. This hypothesis does not imply that such transformation occurs completely on one occasion. It is perfectly within the frame of the hypothesis that the change in the process, or rather in thc trace of it (see p. 540), be no more than a slight shift in the dircction of the trué process; any degree of such a shift, from the merest beginning to a complete reorganization, is perfectly compatible with our theory.

## 552 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

Thus in one fundamental aspect these cases are like those discussed last—mathematical argument and the intelligent performances of apes—-inasmuch as they involve a transformation of process. Their difference lies in the causes which bring about this transformation. For whereas in the former cases all the data necessary for the transformation were presented simultaneously, in the cases now under discussion something new is required which can only be provided by the animal's activity itself, since no animal could from the mere inspection of the puzzle box discover the device for opening its door, whereas potentially an animal should be able to perceive a box in one corner as a tool useful for reaching a lure suspended from the centre of the ceiling.

Animals master both kinds of tasks. Historically "trial and error" experiments preceded "insight" experiments, and it is these former which clamour for a law of effect or success. For I am as fully convinced as Thorndike himself that—in these cases—the success of the action performed is responsible for its being learned. I differ from Thorndike only in the interpretation of this effect of success. For Thorndike, success, i.e., the pleasure of obtaining the goal, stamps in a previously existing "connection." In my theory success transforms a process in such a way as to give it a new "meaning," i.., a new rôle in its total goal-directed activity. In my theory success need not be the only effect to change the trace of a unitary process. Failure may be another, punishment a third, and there is still room for many other varieties of results of actions.

## THE AFTER-EFFECT OF TRACES

Thus we have discussed the three aspects of learning and can now take up our two remaining problems, the after-effect of traces in its various forms, and the arousal of a new process in thought, two problems which, as we have seen, are not unrelated to each other.

The first problem arises from the preceding discussion when we analyze the term "availability" which we have used so often with reference to traces. Availability means only that the trace, by becoming part of the field of a new process, exerts an influence upon it, the kind of influence exerted remaining as yet undefined. It is this influence which we are to analyze now. Our procedure must be empirical in the sense that we take up one by one a number of such influences as we know from experience, a more systematic approach being excluded by the insufficiency of our knowldge.

Acquisition of Skills. We begin with the acquisition of skills. A great amount of experimental work has been done in this field, practice curves have been obtained for a variety of different accomplishments, and their theoretical significance has been discussed. Our problem, however, will be a different one. We accept the fact of improvement by practice. We ask what this improvement can mean in terms of trace-process dynamics. Furthermore we take it for granted that the problem of achievement pertains to this field of learning as to any other. A process cannot be improved by repetition before it has happened, however primitive and crude the first occurrence of the process may appear compared to its later stages. T e po ow e parlr p us  e time will also remain outside the scope of the present discussion. That new processes occur again and again during the progress of learning seems to be proved by the transitions in the learning curve from one plateau to another.

Our problem is the problem of improvement by practice, reduced to its lowest terms of a relatively simple movement. Why has repetition the effect that it does? In terms of process-trace dynamics this problem has two parts: a certain performance leaves a trace; improvement must be due to the effect of this trace. Therefore two questions arise: (1) How does the new process come into communication with the trace? (2) What effect has the trace on the new process with which it communicates? We shall defer the discussion of the first point, since it enters each and every trace function. What can we say about the second? The general nature of the effect of a trace on a process has been developed before. A trace can influence a process only if it belongs to the field in which the process takes place. We now have to discuss the specific form of this field influence in the acquisition of skill. Previously we have found that a trace field arising from a unitary temporal process exerts its influence on thc continuation of this process by causing certain new part-processcs to occur more easily than others (see Chapter X, p. 449), the ones favoured being those which would give good continuation and closure to the whole process. But the acquisition of skills cannot be treated as one unitary process in the same sense in which a melody must be treated as such (see p. 533), and therefore we cannot simply take over this principle from the old case. Instead we must introduce new assumptions: a first hypothesis would be that a trace as part of the field of a process exerts an influence on the process in the direction of making it similar to the process which originally produced the trace.

## 554 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

First Assumption About The Effect of A Trace. We have encountered an example of such an influence at the end of the last chapter (pp. 5o6 f.), the face taking the place of a chaos of lines which will ever afterwards be seen as a face. This case illustrates our hypothesis very well: a stimulus constellation which can give rise to several perceptual organizations calls out one of them only as soon as this one has occurred and left a trace. Ambiguity of the stimulus pattern with regard to the ensuing process of organization means that the actually occurring process is not caused by the stimulus forces alone; other forces, extraneous to the stimulus pattern, must have tipped the scales in favour of the actual process. A trace of a similar process, this we infer from our example, can be such a force; when it is, it has exerted the influence formulated in our first hypothesis.

The Principle of Action and Reaction Applied to the Trace-PRocess RELaTIon. We shall meet with other manifestations of this influence later. Now we shall try to explain it. Must we introduce this hypothesis as a ncw assumption to explain a number of different effects, or is it possible to derive it from a more fundamental principle inherent in our system? We shall attcmpt the latter course. If a process occurs in a field, it is influenced by that field; but because of the law of action and reaction the field must also be influenced by the process. Consequently, whcn a trace forms part of the field of a process, it will be affected by the occurrence of the process, a possibility which we have previously discussed (see p. 524).² If now the tracc is stablc, it will resist change and will therefore determine the ncw process in such a way that it will not induce such a change. This is achieved when the new proccss is similar to the one which originally produced the trace. If this argument is right, our first hypothesis about the influence exerted by a trace on a process has bcen derived from a far more gencral principle, the principle of mutual interdependence of old trace and new process, which will help us to explain a number of other trace influences as well and which, as a matter of fact, we introduced some time ago in our explanation of the arousal of mclodies (Chapter X, p.).

This Principle Applied to Improvement by RepetItion. Now at last we can raise the question whether our first hypothesis explains the gradual acquisition of skills. And we see at once that it does not. It will explain the relative persistence of a skill, new movements being performed with a fairly high degree of perfection even after long periods of disuse, for here the new process more or less approximates the old ones. But the hypothesis does not yet explain why consecutive pcrformances become increasingly better. The hypothesis as it stands explains recurrence of a process, but not improvement. However, with the help of the more general printiple of the interaction of trace and process we can approach this problem also. Above we assumed that the trace which formed part of the field of a process was in itself stable. Under this cndition it would have the efect of making the new process as similar to the original one as possible. But if the trace is not stable? Then it is under stress towards stability, as we have seen in the last chapter. And therefore its field influence will be such as to produce a process which in its turn will react on the trace so as to make it more stable. In this case, then, the trace would not favour a mere recurrence of the old process to which it owes its existence, but rather the occurrence of a more stable process. In other words such a trace would lead to improvement. The róle of repetition for the acquisition of skills would be explained if we could apply this conclusion to this function. This would mean that we assumed the traces of the first processes to be highly unstable, an assumption which on the face of it seems very plausible. It would have two consequences, both subject to experimental testing. On the one hand a highly unstable trace has, as we have seen (Chapter XI, p. 507) a low survival value. Therefore we should expect that repetition will have no effect if the single performanccs are spaced too far apart. This certainly seems truc and is in striking contrast to the fact just mentioned that an acquired skill will not be lost after a long period of disuse. The low survival value of an unstable trace is opposed to the high survival value of a stable trace systcm. On the other hand an unstable trace, before it disintegrates, will tend to change in the direction 'of greater stability. The acquisition of skills seems to show features well compatible with such an assumption, although Hunter's excellent review of the experiments on learning contains no reference to any experimental work done to establish this point. I mean a sort o "atn" learning, the fct that the performace aer ninteval of rest is often bctter than at any previous learning period. If this effect which many pcople will probably confirm from their own

## 556 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

experience is found to be a true fact,it would indicate that the traces have changed during the rest period in such a way as to produce better performances, and that means, in the terms of our theory, in the direction of greater stability. This assumption would also explain one of the best established facts of learning, viz., the advantage of distributing the repetitions over a long period of time as compared to their accumulation in a few blocks.

All this is hypothesis, but an hypothesis which really explains the acquisition of skills. No doubt it is an abstraction inasmuch as virtually no skill is so simple that it is improved by progress in one direction only. As a rule the process will have to vary in a number of different directions before it becomes perfect, and not all of these directions may be present in the first performances. In other words new achievements, in the sense of our definition, may occur at various stages of the learning process and thereby complicate the picture enormously. Moreover such new achievemcnts may be made possible by previous developments of the processes. In short, on purely theoretical grounds we cannot expect the learning curve to be simple, and that the less since the learning curve represents merely one or a few manifestations of learning which in many, if not in most or all cases, reflect but a part of the actual learning achieved.

Associative Learning. The Docrrine oF Associationism. The next function of memory to be discussed is so-called associative learning in its various aspects. Associationism has in the course of history meant a number of different things, but since the end of the last century it has become a very definite and essentially simple doctrine which tries to explain every acquisition by experience in terms of newly formed associations, i.e., connections between independent units by virtue of which one of them is capable of reproducing the other. Association, in this theory, is the cause of reproduction, although formerly the term association was used indiscriminately for cause and effect, the item reproduced through association being called an association as wcll as the bond which was thought to have caused its reappearance. To avoid misunderstandings we shall reserve the term association for the cause, the connection established by expericnce, and use the term reproduction for the effect, i.e., the item produced by the bond, and the working of the bond. In this nt   al the bond between two or more items, established by mere spatial or temporal contiguity of these items, therefore the same in kind for all items, i.e., independent of their nature. How little such a concept is compatible with the principles of physical science has been duly emphasized by Köhler in a passage which we have previously quoted (see p. 167). Nevertheless, that it was thc true concept of association dominating the theorizing and experimenting of psychologists for at least fifty years is proven by the method of their experimentation. No innovation in psychology is praised more highly, no single event in the history of psychology valued beyond Ebbinghaus's invention of nonsense syllables for the investigation of memory. Now I am far from minimizing this achievement of this highly original and active psychologist who gave us a new tool with which to work experimentally on problems which before had been the domain of uncontrolled everyday observation and pure speculation. But I want to point out that Ebbinghaus's method presupposed a very definite thcory of learning, viz., the theory of association as I have just presented it. Any investigation of learning must usc material which is not yet learned at the time of the experiment. This is a truism. So we might begin to learn long poems or pieces of prose, and Ebbinghaus himself did just that. Why then did he also begin to learn nonsense syllables, a painful achievement with no gain to one's knowledge? The reason is simple under the associationistic assumptions: since all learning consists in the formation of associations it can best be studicd with material which is entirely unassociated when learning begins. Words, which form the clcments of poetry and prose, have entered into innumerable associations before the learning of the particular text begins and therefore such learning is not learning from scratch but learning partly supported, partly inhibited, by an uncontrollable mass of pre-existing associations. Only meaningless new material should therefore be uscd whcn one wants to control all efective factors. This argument, however, is conclusive only if the processes of learning meaningful and meaningless material are identical in kind, diffcrent only in degree of complexity. Only if every connection bctwcen several items is of one and the same kind, viz., association, one kind of material can be selected to study the laws opcrative in learning of cvery kind of material. Therefore the difference between the two sequences: ,

Pud sol dap rus mik nom and A thing of beauty is a joy for ever, does not lie in the kind of connection existing between the different members of each series, but only in the complexity of the associative pattern. In the second there are many associations in existence when the line is being learned, some of which need only be strengthened by the learning process, like a thing," o beauty," s a,"  j" o eve "is a joy,"for ever," while the first pattern has to be built u entirely during the learning process. On the other hand, the terms of the second series must have incurred previous associations which inhibit or obstruct the forming of new ones according to the law of associative inhibition which says: if an item A has been associated with an item B it will be more difficult to associate it with an item C than if it had not been previously associated with B. Thus "a" has been connected with innumerable other words, so has "is," "for," "beauty." Since no such inhibition exists for the terms of the first series, it is not easy for association theory to explain why the second line is learned and retained so much more easily than the first, a difficulty which, as far as I know, was never explicitly men-. tioned by the associationists. In order to complete this side of the picture we need only add that associations are also formed betwcen terms not following upon each other directly, c.g., bctween pud and dap in the first series, their strength depending not only upon the proximity of the terms but also upon their position within the series. The sumc is of course true of the second series, so that in each product of lcarning we have a complicated set of associations of various strength, in both meaningful and meaningless material. The association thcory can at best ascribe to these associations, their facilitating and inhbiting effects, definite quantitative values after the learning effect has been cstablishcd—and even that has never really been attempted—but it cannot predict before the cvent which will be strong, which weak; this is only another way of saying that it cannot really explain the difference between the learning of meaningless and meaningful material, if one means by explanation the deduction from previously established principles.

Association, then, has meant something much more specific than "the establishment of functional relations among psychological activities and states in the course of individual experience," a definition which Robinson (p. 7) introduces." Association has mcant one kind of functional relationship, produced by mcrc contiguity and independent of the properties of the terms. It is, to use a German term, entircly "sachfremd," i.e., external, adventitious, contingent.

But there is still another side to associationism. In considering association as the cause of reproduction one considers it as a force, a force which starts a new process. The fact that A and B have become associated not only makes it possible for B to appear when A has been reinstated, it would even make it necessary if there were no other forces operative at the moment. Since, however, at any one moment numberless associations are operating, the association A B is only one component in the complex interplay of forces, the additive resultant of which will determine the result.

AsSOCIATIONIsM AND THE WüRZBURG ScHOOL. It was here that the first reaction against associationism set in. It seemed incredible that this resultant should so often lie in the direction of an ordered and purposive sequence of ideas or train of thoughts. Although, as we have seen, it was quite impossible to predict the strength and number of the individual associations operating at a given time, it was in many cases perfectly possible to predict the results, i.e., the actual course which the train of thought will take. We recall merely the experiments on the learning of a new rclation reported in Chapter XI (pp. 509 f.). Iow can we predict that a person instructed to name the opposite will answer "bad" to the word "good," and not "man" or "boy," or "is," or "bctter," or "hopc," although we have not the faintest idea of the relative strength of these different associations? The clear recognition of this difficulty by Oswald Kulpe gave rise to the work of the Würzburg school which about thirty years ago began to shock the psychological world and destroyed many a bond of personal allegiance and loyalty. Unfortunately the solution which this school proposed for the diffculty it had discerned was not tenable, and so it happened that its real discovery, the insufficiency of associationism, was buried together with its positive contribution. The Würzburg school found itself in the same predicament as the Graz school and shared its fate; psychologists were equally ungrate-o b.The Grazhol, o u the   nfels, found that no sensation theory could explain shapes, and therefore they added to the concept of sensation, which they left untouched, the concept of a higher mental function "production" and o it product the "Gestaltqualit," the produc ea," the of extrasensory origin." Similarly the Wurzburg school found the concept of association insufficient to explain the orderly and purposive nature of our thinking, and so they added to it, without modifying it, the concept of a new forcc, the "determining tendency," which was defined in terms of its effects, just as the process of production was by the Graz school. Both concepts were intro-

## 560 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

duced to explain order, order imposed upon material which by itself lacked order; in each case a ncw force appeared as a deus ex machina, introducing a profound dualism into psychology, a dualism between blind mechanical and ordered mental forces. In short, both solutions were vitalistic, and for that reason both are equally unacceptable to us.

As a matter of fact the introduction of the determining tendency left the scheme of associationism in one sense intact. The principle of the resultant force as the strongest by mere algebraic addition was retained in the system for a long time, till Selz recognized its inadequacy.® The determining tendency entered this scheme solely as a new force, non-associative in origin, to be added to the multitudinous associative forces, strengthening those bonds which would lead in its direction. It was therefore only consistent with the general principle when Ach conceived the idea of bringing an association and a determining force into conflict and thereby measuring the strength of the latter by the strength of the former, which he regarded as measurable. If the combination "good fellow" has been very strongly associated, thcn it should occur that a person instructed p  o by saying "fellow" instead of saying "bad." Ach, working not with such meaningful matcrial but with nonsense syllables, made many experiments which he interpreted as supporting his view. We shall discuss them later when we develop a positive theory. They were mentioned herc chiefly to show the nature of the Wurzburg principles: the conservation of the associative forces, and the additive character of the combination of association and determination.

TheorY F Roe LeaRning. After this brif hitorical survey, whic acqaintus with te oldest and most hallwd o all pychological theories, let us approach our problem systematically. The association principle was supposed to have universal application. In our systematic procedure wc must start from a definite case, and since rote learning hus played such a large part in the experimentation of the associationists, we shall choose it as our starting point. What is the effect of rote learning? In the first place: that we can, when we o desire, reproduce, i. recite, the material learned by heart; that we can continue the sequence when somebody else starts it, a test which in the case of series of nonsense syllables takes the form of the method of paired associates, in which one member of the series is repeated to the learner and he has to reproduce the next one. There are other effects of rote learning, notably that we recognize the material, an effect which will be discussed later when we discuss the problem of recognition, and besides that many more which we shall neglect, since they do not directly concern the problem of association as manifested by our material.

A discrepancy betweeN facT and association theorY. Let us then say that a person has learned a series composed of twelve nonsense syllables. He encounters one of these syllables again; what will happen? According to the association theory this syllable should at once reproduce the one that followed or preceded it, unless other associations were stronger at the moment. Such other associations would have to originate in other data encountered simultaneously with the syllable, since the strongest association which the syllable has formed connects it with either of those two other syllables. If, therefore, other data are removed, as far as that is possible, the above result should inevitably follow. But this is not the case, as special experiments by Lewin have proved (1922, I, pp. 227 f.). Syllables which had been learned by 30o repetitions and which, if tested by the method of paired associates, would yield correct responses with short reaction times, failed to call up anything if presented under a neutral instruction, according to which the subject was to read the syllable presented in the exposure apparatus but to refrain from any active attempt at reproduction. This result, not derivable from the law of association as usually formulated, can mean two things in terms of our theory. Since reproduction of the following (or any other learned) syllable would mean that the trace system of the learned series had come into communication with the newly perceived syllable, forming part of the field in which this perceptual process occurred, failure to reproduce must mean either that no such communication took place or that the trace field, even when it is in communication with the process, is not capable of producing the process of naming, or thinking of, another syllable. Thus the fact of reproduction raises at once the problem of the communication of the new process with an old trace or trace system. Without such communication the old experience can have no possible bearing upon the new process, a point clearly discerned by Höfding (1889-9o), but practically forgotten since then, until Köhler took it up again in his paper read before the International Congress of Psychology at Copenhagen in 1932.

TwO PossiBlE EXpLanaTIonS oF THIS FacT. The rcsult of the Lewin experiment, if it could be interpreted as due to a failure of the new

## 562 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

process to communicate with the old trace, would mean that such communication presupposed, at least in the case of nonsense syllables, a definite Ego attitude: when the subjects were instructed to name the following syllable, they could do so with great facility, whereas this syllable did not emerge when, owing to the instruction, they had no wish or attitude of reproducing. This conclusion depends, of course, on the truth of our interpretation. Fortunately Lewin's account of his experiment contains some extra evidence which makes it at least very plausible. For reproduction is not the only effect which a trace system has upon a process with which it communicates: there is the more primitive effect of recognition, which, whatever its dynamics, presupposes some such communication. Therefore, if the syllables had been recognized and yet led to no reproduction, our interpretation would be wrong; while, on the other hand, a lack of recognition accompanied by failure to reproduce, would greatly increase its probability. As a matter of fact, in Lewin's experiments the second alternative was realized; the syllables that failed to have a reproductive cffect also failed to be recognized. Thcrefore it seems furly safe to assume that they did not come into communication with the old traccs. So our conclusion about the effect of Ego-attitudes upon such communication would be justified.

But this does not mean that the second of the two alternatives enumerated above is excluded, namely, that traccs, though in communication with a present process, do not le.ad to reproduction. The result of Lewin's experiment, if interpreted in my way, says nothing about the efect that a trace system exerts upon a process with which it is in communication. It may or it may not be capable of ercng erouction by  mee comunication, witt any special force like an Ego-attitudc. While working in the famous laboratory of the University of Wurzburg as early as 19o9, I made some experiments which throw some light on this question (1912). They were similar to Lewin's experiments in using practically the same instruction; they differed from them in being a modification of the old type of association expcriment rather than a modification of the paired-associate memory experiments. I called out a word to my subjects, who were instructed to listen and passively wait for anything that might come to their consciousness. The results corresponded perfectly to Lewin's. The passive attitude proved to be very unstable, tending to be quickly replaced by a definite active attitude, often unknown to the subject. But before such an attitude developed my subjects were as much at sea as Lewin's:

nothing would come to their minds, and the experience of passive waiting was distinctly painful. In all these respects the two sets of experiments are in exact correspondence. But dynamically there is this difference between them: the words that my subjects were presented with were understood by them, i.e., they did communicate with older trace systems. The failure to reproduce anything in my experiments can therefore not be explained by lack of communication. Here a trace field existed, and yet its influence alone was not sufficient to start a process of reproduction, whereas reproductions of various kinds occurred with great ease as soon as "latent attitudes" had developed. The second alternative may thus be a very real one. There exist conditions under which a trace field in communication with a process is not capable of influencing this process in the sense of reproduction.

That much we can deduce from my old experiments, but no morc. At least to me it would seem premature to generalize that under no conditions can a trace ficld have this effect.

THE RôLE OF THE TRACE IN REPRODUCTION. BefOre We follOW up the two problems raised in the preceding discussion, viz., the causes which make a process communicate with a trace and the rôle which special attitudes play in reproduction, we shall trcat a third one, corresponding to the problem discussed in the scction on motor skill: What is the function of a trace in those cases where reproduction occurs? We hear "to be or" and we continue "not to be"; wc want to recite a poem that we have learned, and we do it; we are presented with a syllable from a previously well learned series and instructed to name the one that followed upon it, and we produce the right answer. In the last two cases our intention is without a doubt among thc causcs of the respective processes, the recitation and the naming of the syllable; in the first casc, it is not so easy to establish the existcnce of a similar attitude. But in all three cases the present performance would be impossible without traces \*from carlicr ones. Therefore we accept it as a fact that these traces are in communication with thc processes, and we grant that these processes are set in motion by causcs extcrnal to the traces (intentions, attitudes). Even so, the trace has a very definite influence on the process. Of what kind is this influencc? Can we derive it from the general law formulated on pages 554 f., viz., that a trace will influence a process in such a way that the reactive influence exerte by the process on the trace will not diminish. but if possible inc at Wns  e zato was accustomed to $\mathbf { d o } ,$ as a number of separate items merely joined or coupled together by some bond. That we must treat traces as organized products of organized processes has been demonstrated in the last two chapters; it is therefore no new hypothesis introduced in order to explain reproduction.

Rote Learning a Process of Organization. We shall now apply this principle to our present case: In what sense is a series of nonsense syllables organized? We have seen in the historical introduction to this section that this material was chosen just because it seemed to fit thc associationistic assumptions: a number of unconnected items. And judged by accomplishment the learning of such material seemed good proof of these assumptions. But accomplishment of so crude a kind gives us no knowledge of the processes which made it possible, a point stressed sufficiently in our previous discussions. Variation of experimental procedure has instead produced ample proof that the performance which leads to the learning of a nonsense series is a process of organization. Thus it is impossible to learn a series of ten nonsense syllables without some rhythmization; as a rule these series are learned in trochaic rhythm, so that they become organized into five pairs which form real parts of the whole series, just as each syllable of a pair is a real part of it. This formation of pairs is a fact of true organization, and not explicable in terms of mere association. A purely associationistic explanation of this fact would have to explain thc formation of pairs like this: the members of a pair are more closely associated with each other than either of them with its other neighbour; $\mathbf { i . e . , }$ the associations (all in a forward direction) bctween an odd and an even member are stronger than those between an even and an odd one. For example, in a series: a $\boldsymbol { b } / c d / e f / , c$ is more strongly associated with $\pmb { d }$ than with $\delta ,$ or than d with e. That this explanation of the pair character is wrong has been proved by very ingenious and elaborate experiments by Witasek, posthumously published by Auguste Fischer. Only one of the many experiments will be reported here.

Witasek's Experiments. On one day the subject learned four preliminary series of ten nonsense syllables, symbolized thus:

$$
\mathrm { I _ { 1 } I _ { 2 } \ : \ : I _ { 3 } I _ { 4 } \ : \ : I _ { 5 } I _ { 6 } \ : \ : I _ { 7 } I _ { 8 } \ : \ : I _ { 0 } I _ { 1 0 } }
$$

$$
\underline { { \Pi } } _ { 1 } \underline { { \Pi } } _ { 2 } \dots \dots \dots \underline { { \Pi } } _ { 9 } \underline { { \Pi } } _ { 1 0 }
$$

$$
\Pi _ { 3 } ^ { \mathrm { I I I } } { } _ { 2 } ^ { \mathrm { I I I } } { } _ { 8 } \ \cdots \ \cdots \ \Pi _ { 9 } ^ { \mathrm { I I I } } { } _ { 1 0 }
$$

$$
\mathbf { I V _ { \perp } I V _ { 2 } \ldots . . . . . I V _ { \perp 0 } I V _ { 2 0 } }
$$

Here the Roman figures refer to the number of the series, the Arabic ones to the syllables within the series. Learning was regarded as completed when the subjects were able to recite the series at the rate of seven seconds per series. One hour later they had to learn three test series of the following kind:

A: XI\_\_II\_II\_II,I\_ IVOX

B: xII2 IIII. IIIIV IV,IR IoX

C: Xx IVIV. II II,II IIII

That is: each of these new series A, B, and C was composed of eight syllables learned in one of the first four series and of two new ones, symbolized by x. To understand the principle according to which these series were built we glance back at the first four series and consider a feature not yet discussed. Since all these series were learnd in trochaic rhythm they were articulated into five pairs. Now, on the associationistic assumption, a pair is distinguished from a non-pair by the greater strength of the associative bond that exists between its members. Thus the strength of association between two successive members of a series must vary periodically, being stronger when an odd member precedes the even than when an even precedes the odd. Thus the first syllable is more strongly associated with the second than the second with the third, the third more strongly with the fourth than the fourth with the fifth, and so on. I have symbolized this by connecting two successive syllables in the schema by loops, two loops indicating a stronger association than one. The same symbolism has been employed for the three critical series A, B, and C, but this time not to designate the strength of the associations to be created by the learning of these new series, but that of the associations taken over into the new series from the old ones. Thus one sees that both series A and C contain four strong associations built up by the learning of the four original series, while sri B cntais ny our ol we assatins. Therefore,  rou formation were nothing but association, series A and C should be learned with equal ease, more easily than B. That the other points of difference between these three series do not, according to the association principle, favour A more than the others has been shown in an elaborate discussion by Witasek. J

Each subject had twelve sttings, i.e., they learnéd twelve sets of four preliminary and three critical series. The result contradicted the expectation derived from the associationistic premise: in order of difficulty the three series ranked: $\mathbf { A } > \mathbf { B } \geqslant \mathbf { C } ,$ i.e., C was by far the easiest, and the slight difference between A and B was in favour of B. For a full discussion of this result the reader must again turn to the original. Its main bearing, however, is clear: group formation is not association, i.e., a bond between individual items which can vary only in the dimension of strength, but organization, through which the two members of a pair have become a real unit, separated from the next unit. For in $\mathbf { c } ,$ the series most easily learned, the pairs were retained as pairs; in $\mathbf { A } _ { \mathbf { y } }$ the series most difficult to learn, the same fumber of strong associations was preserved as in $\mathbf { c } ,$ but now it was to be no longer an association of members of one pair, but an association between the last member of a preceding and the first of a succeeding pair; in B finally the weak associations of this inter-pair character were maintained. $\bar { \mathbf { I } } . \mathbf { e } . ,$ association in these experiments counts not as association per $\pmb { \mathscr { s e } }$ but through the function which the association has in the organization of the series. This means, of course, that the term "association" is no longer aRpropriate, since the kind of connection takes on the decisive rôle, a characteristic for which the association thcory has no place.

To explain the results of Witasek's experiments concretely is impossible because of two possibilities betwcen which we cannot decide: (a) it is possible that a trace systcm in which the syllables k and I are members of a pair obstructs the formation of a new organization in which they belong to different pairs, k being the second member of the preceding and 1 the first of the succeeding; or (b) it is possible that the k I trace is brought into play only if the new process has the same organization, but not if it is of the type of series A, i.e., i k, 1 m.

However, for our purposes it is not necessary to decide between the two alternatives, since both prove that a learned series is an organized series and that therefore the traces must be organized too.

Interaction of Organized Trace and Process and the Law of $\pmb { R e } \cdot$ production. And now we can take up our question as to the function of a trace system in the reproduction of material learned by heart. We said it could be derived from our general principle of the dynamic relation between trace and process, viz., that the former will influence the latter so that by interaction it does not lose stability (see p. 563). If a whole series has been learned, then its trace system forms an articulated unit. When the subject begins to recite the series, his process must be in communication with this trace system. $\mathbf { I f } ,$ then, the first syllable has been recited, the part of the trace corresponding to this syllable has been in communication with a process while the rest has not, so that, if the process should stop, the whole trace system would have been changed by the fact that to one part of it something had happened and to the other not. If the trace is stable it will resist such change and it can do so by inducing the continuation of the process until all members have been in communication with a new process; i.e., the trace will exert a force on the field in which the process occurs so as to make the process "complete." To explain reproduction we do not need an assumption of special associative bonds; rather the possibility of reproduction follows from the fact of organization and the general principle of the interaction betwcen trace and process. And the traditional law of association should be replaced by the following formulation: if a proccss communicates with a part of a trace system, the whole trace system will exert a force on thc process in the direction of making it as complete as it was when it created this trace system.

That this formulation is indeed compatible with the facts is easily proved. I can adduce as witnesses Müller and Pilzecker, whose work is one of the finest of pure associationistic literature. Nobody could accu G.Muller a b  fvour  estal ty.

Müller and Pilzecker's Initial Reproductive Tendency as Supporting Our Theory. Müller and Pilzecker write: "If one says to an educated German the word 'Eisenhammer,' then most probably he will recall the unitary word complex 'Der Gang nach dem Eisenhammer,'" and many other examples could be given for similar occurrences. Experiences of this kind seem to warrant the following conclusion: if a series of successive ideas, once or several times repeated, form a unitary complex of ideas, then each constituent of this complex, and particularly its terminal member, when it recurs in consciousness, has the tendency to reproduce first the initial member and then the others in their proper sequence. We shall designate this reproductive tendency, at first directed towards .the initial member of the complex, as the initial reproductive tendency" (p. 199).

Two things have to be distinguished in this quotation, the fact and the interpretation of the fact. The fact is the re-instatement of the whole complex by one of its parts; the interpretation culminates in the term initial reproductive tendency, which dissolves this fact into an associative relation between two isolated members. True enough, the two authors leave it an open question whether the tendency aroused by the part is directed only towards the initial member, which in its turn reproduces the next and so forth, or whether it is directed immediately towards the reproduction of the whole complex. But characteristically they discuss this alternation only in a footnote, while the above quotation with the introduction of the new term occurs in the text. And by coining and employing this term they tacitly accept the first interpretation, whereas to an unbiassed observer the second is undoubtedly the more plausible one. A glance at the English examples given in the last footnote will make this clear: it is not the definite or indefinite article-in each case the "first term of the complex"—which is being directly reproduced, but the main word which completes the meaning. But then the initial reproductive tendency, whose eficacy Müller and Pilzecker have proved by special experiments with nonsense syllables, confirms our statement of the law of reproduction: a part of a trace tends to establish the whole process that gave rise to the whoke trace.

The Quantitative Aspect of the Law of Reproduction. The use of the word "tends" in this last formulation was intentional; it does not mean to emasculate the statement, nor has it a purely statistical significance; instead it is to indicate the quantitative aspect of this law: the force exerted by the trace (see our first formulation on p. 567) may vary in strength, and so may other forces which at the same time influence the process. Our law is then a law not about effects, but about causes; and the quantitative aspect implied in our last formulation has to be amplified. The force which the trace field exerts upon the new process will depend on many conditions, among which the degree and kind of communication must be very important, although at the moment we can say nothing about them. Another condition, however, is inherent in the trace itself: since the influence which the trace exerts on the process is intrinsically related to the stability of the trace, its force must be a direct function of this stability: ceteris paribus, the greater the stability of the whole trace, the more strongly will a part process be influenced by the trace in the direction of completion.

Stability of a Trace. Contiguity as One of Many Factors of Organization. Meaningless and Meaningful Material. Stability of a whole trace means that in this unit each part is held in its place by strong forces which resist a displacement. The stability of a trace must therefore be a function of its dynamic structure. The "better"

this structure, the more will the whole be a real unit and consequently the parts dependent on each other and their function in this whole. We have studied unit formation in earlier chapters and can apply the knowledge gained there to our present problem. There we encountered proximity as a strong factor, the same factor which appeared in associationism as contiguity. We now understand its meaning. Contiguity plays its part in reproduction to the degree to which it has unified the contiguous parts. Thus, although each syllable in a series of nonsense syllables is contiguous to two others it will reproduce one of them more easily than another, viz., the one that belongs to the same pair. For unit formation depends upon a number of factors other than mere contiguity. Parts which "ft" each other, which jointly form a "good curve," are more strongly unified than such as have no intrinsic relation and are linked by mere proximity. Such "good continuation" distinguishes a meaningful text from a nonsense series; therefore the process corresponding to the apprehension of the meaningful material must be better organized than that corresponding to a nonsense series, and hence the trace of the former must be more stable than the trace of the latter. This greater stability will endow the former trace with a greater reproductive power"; if one of its parts is in communication with a process, the whole trace will exert a stronger influence on that process than if a part of a nonsense-trace communicates with a process. For in the former case the process finds in the stability of the trace greater resistance to its proceeding in a different way than it does in the latter. It is a common experience that we can recall meaningful material better than meaningless, an experience which was long ago quantitatively confirmed by Bühler, whose experiments at the same time indicate that recall does not go from part to part, but from part to whole. The difference between meaningful and mcaningless material is, therefore, not a difference in number and strength of associations, as associationism assumed (see pp.556 ff.), but a difference in kind of organization. Just as great number of "ideational" organizations, different from each other in kind, complexity, and stability. Once more: mere contiguity, qua contiguity, has no effect. It enters the causal serny through its effect on organization. Even thcre it is not enough. We have seen that series of nonsense syllables can be learned only if they are read in a definie rythm, i when they are beingor ganized by an extraneous factor. On the other hand, von Restorff's experiments have shown that under other conditions meaningless

## 570 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

material can be learned fairly easily and without this extraneous influence. But in her experiments again proximity (contiguity) was not the only factor, but proximity of similars in a surrounding of differents. Here the unifying principle was the gradient between the isolated" and the "repeated" material (cf. Chapter XI, pp. 485 f.). In discussing her experiments we distinguished between two possible explanations of the difficulty involved in learning a series of nonsense syllables, the one based on its "monotony," the other on its "nonsense" character. Von Restorff's experiments emphasized the first factor, which heretofore had been neglected in favour of the second. But it would be a misinterpretation of her results to think that the other factor played no rôle at all. We have just discussed the greater stability which a trace must possess when it derives from a meaningful rather than from a meaningless process. But what is true of the stability of the trace is also true of the process of organization itself which builds the trace. Meaningful material is more easily organized than meaningless, although it may be difficult to transform (more or less) meaningless material into (more or less) meaningful material, as when we gradually come to understand a mathematical proof.

Summary: Arbitrary Connections Replaced by Dynamic Organizations. Summarizing, we can say that we have so far examined one aspect of the concept of association: the arbitrary character of the associative connection. We have seen that the organization of arbitrarily joined items in one whole is only an extreme case in a whole class of cases, and that even in this case mere contiguity is not a sufficient factor. The connection: pud-sol is certainly not the archetype of all connections or, rather, organizations. Instead there are numberless possibilities of organization in which the members of the whole are held together by intrinsic relations, which in our theory must be regarded as dynamic relations of the nervous processes.

Does This Lead to "Psychologismus"? Psychology and Logic. Such a theory seems to imply an extreme Psychologismus, i.e., the view that all logical, subsistent, relations can be explained by psychological or even physiological existing relations. This view, which had gained ground at the turn of the century, was violently attacked by some of our best philosophers, notably Edmund Husserl, who claimed to have refuted it once and for all. But his argument rested on the assumption, implicit or explicit, in all "psychologistic" theres, that psychological relations were merely factual  external. A "psychologism" based on this assumption has indeed been refuted by Husserl and other philosophers. But this refutation does not affect our psychologism-if our theory can rightly be given this name— since in our theory psychological and physiological, or rather psychophysical, processes are organized according to intrinsic or internal relations. This point can only be alluded to. It means that in our theory psychology and logic, existence and subsistence, even, to some extent, reality and truth, no longer belong to entirely different realms or universes of discourse between which no intelligible relationship exists. It is here, if anywhere, that psychology will have to prove the integrative function that we assigned to it in the first chapter.

Association as a Force. Lewin. It is now time to consider the other aspect of association, according to which it is a force which by itself causes reproduction (see p. 559). Against this side of the old concept Lewin has levclled a most energetic and well supported attack (1926). He summarizes his conclusions in the following words:

"The experimental investigation of habit formation (association) has shown that the couplings created by habit never supply as such the motor of a mental event; such an interpretation is erroneous also if onc sees the essential side of habit—and practice-processes not in the formation of piecewise associations, but in the transformation and creation of definite activity-wholes. Rather in all cases certain mental energies, originating as a rule in a pressure of will or needs, i.e., mental systems under stress, are the necessary conditions of mental events" (p. 311).

Lcwin rightly distinguishes, in this quotation, between couplings, on the one hand, and forces and energics on the other. "Mere connections," he says, "are never 'causes' of events in whatever form they may exist" (pp. 312-3), and he applies this distinction with equal force to old atomistic associationism and to a gestalt intcrpretation of the connections. The application to atomistic associations is easy. Lewin himself uses the analogy of the train where all carriages are coupled together, but move, not because of the couplings, necessary though they are, but because of the steam power of the locomotive. Indeed, the concept of association being primarily a concept to explain connections, it is difficult to sec how it can at the same time fulfil the function of a propelling force and a reservoir of energy. The mere fact that the concept was endowed with this double function (of connecting and propelling) is no defence against Lewin's criticism, for associationism has never shown how the same substratum of association could function in this double manner. But Lewin goes further than that; he shows that the "strength of an association," if measured by the result it can produce under definite instructions or attitudes, may be quite different from the "strength of association" if measured by what it must do under any instruction; or rather that only the former can be measured and therefore defined, whereas the latter may in many cases be zero. In other words: in the terms of the association theory, the definition of association as a bond has sense, whereas its definition as a "motor" has none.

Our Theory Escapes Lewin's Criticism. It Supplies (a) Forces. But, as we have'seen, Lewin levels the same criticism also against a non-associationistic theory, which "considers not a chainlike coupling of members but the integration of the parts in the whole as the 'cause' of the event" (p. 311), because, as he adds in a footnote, such an hypothesis does not use the concept of tensions in a dynamic system. It is immaterial to examine how justified he was when he wrote his unusually significant and important article. In-we hall e er  ccm  ppcb  te y developed in the preceding pages. We have, on purpose, left this question in abeyance, discussing merely what kind of influence a trace must exert on a process, no matter how such a process was started. But the answer to our question treated the trace as a dynamic system under tension, a tension which would favour one kind of process and obstruct other kinds. Therefore it is no longer obvious that Lewin's arguments affect our hypothesis as they did the association theory. If the trace as an organized system under stress exerts a force upon a process it is no longer evident why it should not also be able to start a process, why, in other words, the revival of a part of a larger whole, if in communication with the whole trace, should not of and by itself, through its relation to the trace, lead to reproduction of the whole, why under all conditions another, external, force should be necessary. As far as the forces are concerned, "automatic" or "spontaneous" reproduction, i.e., reproduction without the "intention to reproduce," should be perfectly possible.

(b) EneRgies. But there remains the energy aspect. To quote again from Lewin: "In order for a process to occur, energy capable of doing work must be set free. Hence for every mental event the question must be raised as to the origin of the effective energies" (p: 313). Every system under stress contains energy capable of doing work, and therefore the necds and quasi-needs (intentions, resolves) which Lewin introduces as "motors" of events are well also systems under stress it might seem as though they also might be thought of as supplying the energy for the process. Such an assumption would, however, run into great difficulties if it considered the trace systems as such as the store of energy. For, since reproduction is possible in an unlimited number of single occasions, the store of energy in the trace system would have to be practically unlimited also, and that is an assumption too improbable to be admitted.

How else then can we account for the energy consumed in the process? To answer this question we must make explicit an implicit feature of Lewin's theory. We have seen that in his system the cause of my writing a letter lies in a need or quasi-need to do so, i.e., in a system under stress which ultimately supplies the energy for this action. The word "ultimately" was used on purpose, for the acts of opening a drawer to get the necessary stationery, of unscrewing the fountain pen, of moving the chair to the right place, and finally of tracing the words on paper consume disproportionately more energy than is stored in the need-system; it is the energy stored in our muscles which is being liberated and directed by this system. The energy relation between the system which acts as "motor" of the activity and the executed actions is thus a very indirect one. The original energy achieves the result by liberating and steering this energy, even in Lewin's theory.

With this knowledge let us return to spontaneous reproduction. A part of a larger whole process is rearoused and communicates with a trace system. Then, according to our hypothesis, the whole trace system is put under new pressure, because of the fact that only one of its parts is in communication with a process, a stress which can be relieved by the reinstatement of the whole process. Is it then an illegitimate assumption that the energy of this pressure liberates other energy stored in the brain field to keep the process going? It ·seems to me no more so than the assumption implicit in Lewin's theory e w    e i stored in the muscles. Perhaps an even simpler assumption is possible: the energy put in the trace system by the tension might go directly into the new process. Both assumptions escape the difficulty inherent in the assumption of a trace as an inexhaustible store of energy. For in both the energy is supplied to the trace system by its communication with a process which in its turn was caused by forces oute the trace system, e.., in perception. Thus it seems as though spontaneous reproduction were perfectly possible within the frame-

TABLE 29
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>syllables</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=3>taskreprod.           invert            rhyme</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>o</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0+</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>+-</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>+</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>••</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0+</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>++</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>+-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>•</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0+</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>+-</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>++</td></tr></table>

Therefore, the syllable demanded by the instruction should be most promptly supplied in the two + + cases, next in the three 0 + ones, and least in the four + - ones; in the latter, errors should be likely to occur. The n syllables are omitted from this discussion, since they contribute nothing conclusive either way.

The actual reaction timcs, taken from Ach's table, are contained in Table 3o, the figures representing the median of all reactions in thousandths of a second.

TABLE 30 (from Ach)
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">syuavns</td><td colspan="3">task</td></tr><tr><td>reprod.</td><td>invert</td><td>rhyme</td></tr><tr><td>o</td><td>881</td><td>841</td><td>1132</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>767</td><td>664</td><td>895</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>871</td><td>804</td><td>777</td></tr></table>

To some extent this table confirms our expectations: the highest figure occurs with a + — constellation, the lowest with a + + one. But there are a number of discrepancies, which will appear when we look at the rank order of the different constellations.

<table><tr><td>n  $6 6 _ { 4 } + +$   $\yen 123,45$   $z 7 7 + +$ </td><td>6∞ 5</td></tr></table>

The most striking facts are the relatively short reaction times in Nos. $2 , 4 ,$ and 5, and all three have something to do with inverting. No. $\pmb { 2 } ,$ the second shortest of all, concerns the reproduction of inverted syllables, Nos. 4 and 5 the inversion of r and o syllables. Also the n syllables, so far excluded from our discussion, have significantly lower reaction times for "inverting" than for "reproducing" and rhyming.

A last way of looking at the fgures of our table is to average the values for the + +, the0 +, and the +- cases.8

TABLE 31
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Constellation</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>++</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>0+</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>+-</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>Average reaction time</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>745</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1090</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1059</td></tr></table>

This survey confirms the expectations only inasmuch as the + + constellation has the shortest reaction times, but the two others, whose difference is probably insignificant, are in contradiction with Ach's assumption.

The quantitative analysis of the reaction times (and this holds for Ach's other subjects as well as for the one from whose results our tables are taken), although giving some indication of the expected results, fails to confirm the theory, thereby showing that factors must have been at work which are not included in Ach's theory. We mention only the fact that the pairs of the i series were more strongly associated than those of the two others, and that, as the subjects reported, they were easier to learn. It is characteristic of the period in which Ach worked that, although he particularly stresses this point, he does not see its incompatibility with strict associationistic principles. For according to these the material properties of the terms associated should have no bearing on the strength o te assoiatn betwee them. The act that hy have, theeore,

## 578 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

invalidates these principles: it proves again that organization has taken place and that within the range of organization possible for nonsense syllables the symmetry of a syllable and its "mirror image" is particularly stable.

The most significant among these quantitative results, the shortening of the reaction times if the "homogeneous" task is substituted for the mere reproduction, and the lengthening of it when the heterogeneous task takes its place, is clearly realized even in this model case, only for the task of inverting and not for that of rhyming. In other experiments even this regularity disappears, so that we cannot accept the figures as proofs of Ach's theory.

On the other hand the qualitative rcsults add some evidence in favour of Ach's assumption. With the two hcterogeneous activities of inverting and rhyming a great number of errors occurred, namely twelve oul of a possible twenty for rhyming, and seven out of a possible twenty for inverting. In these cases not the syllable demanded by the instruction was named but the one closely associated with the stimulus syllable. Habit has been stronger than will, if Ach's interpretation is right. Again we must add, however, that no other subject showed so many wrong reactions as this one, that in several cascs they failed to appear at all. I am using this statistical argument only to point out that evidently Ach's conditions are not compulsory and that therefore other factors than those he discriminated and sought to control may have played an important rôle.

LEwIn's work. We can now pass to Lewin's work, for he succeeded where Ach failcd: he could create conditions which would produce wrong reactions or at least strong retardations of reaction time, and such as would lead to ncither the one nor the other. Before he achieved this he had repeated Ach's experiment with a greatly simplified method. A number of ordinary (o) serics of nonsense syllables of varying length were learned during sixteen days with a total of 270 repetitions. Thereupon 70 new syllables (n syllables), arranged in five scries of twclve and one of ten, were repeated six times in such a way that each syllable changed its place at each repetition so that it would not become associated with any special one. Finally the activity of inverting was practised with a number of different syllables. Then in the critical experiments in which the subject had to respond by inverting the presented syllables, o and n syllables were presented in alternation. Undcr this instruction the o syllables would fall under the scheme +-, the n syllables under the +0; i.e., the latter should yield shorter reaction times, the former, owing to the great number of repetitions, some wrong responses. Neither of these effects appeared, the reaction times were equal within the limits of error and no false reactions occurred, with one single exception which occurred at the end.

This result, clearly as it contradicts the expectation, is not new. If one goes through Ach's tables and compares the reaction time of o and n syllables with inverting (and rhyming) one finds cases in which they are equal (5), cases in which the n syllables have the shorter reaction times (3), and even one case where the o syllables are favoured. On the other hand we saw that in Ach's experiments wrong reactions occurred. As a matter of fact only one such wrong reaction occurred in Ach's experiments with an o syllable and the task of inverting, five in all with o syllables and the task of rhyming, and altogether these wrong reactions were not frequent in Ach's experiments.

The results so far seem unclear, although they certainly do not confirm the underlying assumptions. A conflict between association and determination does not regularly appear. We saw before that the opposite rcsult, mutual support of these two factors, was not regularly present in Ach's experiments, and it failed to appear at all in Lewin's experiment performed with an interesting modification of Ach's technique. In these experiments associations were not formed by presenting series of syllables to be read and learned, but by presenting syllables to which the subjects had to respond by naming a new syllable which could be produced from the presented ones by changing the first consonant in a prescribed manner. For instance, if the syllable began with d they had to pronounce a syllable beginning with g but otherwise equal, e.g., prescnted syllable dak, response gak. Since the traditional law of association establishes only the conditions that two items must have occurred in contiguity (and with sufficient frequency), this method is as good as the other. With this method one can obtain + + and + — cases in the test, and no difference in the reaction times appeared, nor any wrong reactions.

Thus Lewin's results are in strict contradiction to those of Ach and to the assumptions which guided this author. In order to explain the contradiction Lewin introduced an entirely new theory. We know already that he denies that an association can be the "motor" of any activity. The motor must be somcthing else, a mental act, intention, or "set." And thus he concludes that wrong reactions

## 580 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY fUNCTIONS

occur only where a wrong set is operative, retardation, only where two sets are in conflict. To the proof of this assumption he devotes a number of highly ingenious experiments which can be simplified so as to be performed in the classroom. The underlying idea is that the same result may be accomplished by two different activities, and more easily by the one than by the other, and that the subject will sooner or later choose the easier activity even if it is not the one required by the instruction. This will lead to no mistake as long as the original condition is fulfilled, viz., that the wrong performance leads to the right result. If, however, this wrong activity is exercised on material where it does not produce the correct result, then either the result will be wrong, or a conflict will occur between two activities, with a resultant retardation. These conclusions were amply confirmed.

The procedure was as follows: Eight syllables were "associated" with other syllables by the method last described. That is to say, four of them had to be responded to by another syllable in which the hard initial consonant was to be replaced by a soft one and vice versa (r syllables), example $\pmb { \mathrm { \Delta } t a k - d a k }$ , while the four others had to be inverted (i-syllables). Each syllable was presented thirty-two times, a comparatively small number if compared with the high number of repetitions in the previous series. A very important aspect is the mode of presentation. At first all four r-syllables were presented, each syllable being repeated before the next was named, e.g.:

<table><tr><td>stimulus</td><td>response</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>tak</td></tr><tr><td>A</td><td> $\pmb { \varepsilon } \pmb { \alpha } \pmb { \dot { k } }$ </td></tr><tr><td></td><td> $k e d$ </td></tr><tr><td>ged</td><td> $\overrightarrow { h } e d$ </td></tr></table>

This whole procedure was repeated, and then the same syllables were repeated twice more in simple alternation without successive repetition. Then the i syllables were subjected to the same procedure. Then came more repetitions of the first and the second kind of material, until both had the required 32. After the completion of the learning the testing took place. Again the subjects were presented with syllables, their task being to respond by changing the vowel. First 20 n (new) syllables were called out, then an r syllable, five more n syllables, then an i syllable, six n syllables, another r syllable, and one more  syllable. I.e., the three critical syllables which had been practised before were interspersed in a great number of neutral syllables, with the result that no wrong reaction occurred and that the average reaction time of those critical syllables was exactly the same as the average time of the n syllables. Thus, this first test only confirmed the previous result. But now a new test was added: the instruction was hard-soft rhyming, and the first four syllables were the four r syllables with which this activity had been practised before; they were followed by two syllables taken from these same r syllables, then came the i syllable of the first test, and then the two other r syllables. The result was that the reaction time of the i syllable was 144% (88oo) longer than the average of the r syllables. The same i syllable, which in the first test had not led to any retardation, produced a very large one in this. The experiment finished with a last test in which the task was to invert and in which the procedure was the same as in the preceding, except that the two r syllables used in the first test were interspersed in the midst of i syllables. One of them lcd to a wrong reaction, the other to a retardation of 74% (4800).

Since the same syllables show retardation and wrong reaction in one kind of test but not in another, the cause of these effects cannot be the association which should have shown up in either of them, both conforming to the type + -. The true cause is easy to find. In the two last tests the first six syllables offered for the particular activity, rhyming and inverting, had been learned in conjunction with a rhymed and inverted syllable respectively. There are therefore two ways of fulflling the task of rhyming an r syllable: either really to hyme it, or to do with it what has been done before, i. to reproduce the following syllable. Similarly, when we are asked to add $8 + 4$ we answer 12 without a new process of addition by mere reproduction. Just so the subjects after rhyming one or two r syllables would no longer really rhyme them but reproduce. The method of original presentation for purposes of learning, double presentation of each syllable, had been chosen because it would tend to favour this mode of procedure. There exists, then, a set to reproduce which is as much a set as the set to rhyme, and this set, if applied to an inappropriate syllable (i syllable for rhyming, and r syllable for inverting), must lead to wrong reactions, or if this is checked, to a considerable retardation. When on the other hand, as in the first test, a number of neutral syllables are given for the execution of a task, then there is only one way of doing it, and reproduction cannot take its place. Consequently no set to reproduce dein the right way as the n syllables.

This explanation invalidates one of Ach's assumptions which we have listed in our table on page 576 as 0 +, the assumption, namely, that reproduction is the mere effect of association without any special set.

THE RELATION OF LEWIN'S WORK TO OUR THEORY. HOWEVEr, OUr main question remains as yet unanswered: Are Lewin's results compatible with our theory? Do they prove that an association, or rather an organized trace system, exerts no force on the new process? As far as Ic e nd I hav roessor Lewn' assent  this inion, ty do not. For the same explanation which we gave to his experiments with a perfectly passive attitude (see p. 561) is equally applicable here. It is not proven that in the cases where no retardation or wrong reaction occurred the old traces were in communication with the new process. But if they were not, then they could not, of course, exert any influence upon it. If this is the true explanation of Lewin's results, they are perfectly compatible with our own theory. Thereby thcir significance is not in the least diminished. Instead of bearing on the effect exercised by a trace upon a process they bear on the opposite relationship, the effect produced by a process on the tac stem. For they prove that, in ter o the association thery, the re-arousal of an a does not necessarily carry with it a tendency towards the re-arousal of b, which had previously been associated with a, because the re-arousal of a does not necessarily communicate with the a btrace. In oherwors,cen in ters o it wn they the law of association was incomplete. The recurrence of an a can arouse a tendency for b to appear only when a establishes a communication with the old a b trace system.

Lewin's experiments prove more than this, revealing as'they do a very powerful factor which determines this communication. However, before we follow this lead we shall briefly discuss the fact itself. It secms self-evident, and yet it has gained no recognition in associationistic psychology although it was clearly pointed out and vigorously emphasized by Hoflding in 1889. Hoffding argued like this: I see an apple and am reminded of paradise. Now, the apple that I am seeing at present was never together with a picture of paradise, but a picture of an apple, diferent from the present one, may have been contained in a picture of paradise, or a mere idea of an apple may have been together with an idea of paradise. However this may be, the present apple, so Hoffding argued, must first come into connection with the memory trace of the old apple, because only this can lead to the idea of paradise.

The "Law of Substitution" (or "Assimilation"). This interpretation was not accepted by psychologists, who at the time were completely under the sway of associationism, because it implied the efficacy of similarity for the evocation of the trace by the new process. They preferred to base their theory on the law of contiguity alone. And so they introduced another law, the law of substitution, to explain the same fact. This law says: if an association between $\pmb { \alpha }$ and $\pmb { b }$ has been formed, then not only a will be able to reproduce $b ,$ but also any $\pmb { \alpha } ^ { \prime }$ which is similar to ${ \pmb \alpha } _ { \pmb { \nu } }$ the strength of the reproductive tendency aroused by ${ \pmb a } ^ { \prime }$ varying with the degree of similarity between $\pmb { \alpha } ^ { \prime }$ and $\pmb { \alpha }$ (Müller and Pilzecker). In America this law has been called the law of assimilation—not a good name, since the term assimilation had been used much earlier by Wundt for a very different phenomenon (sec Chapter III, p. 103)—and appears as a real law in the recent prescntation of associitionism by Robinson. It seems to me, however, that this law names what it considers to be a fact without explaining it. It would indced be an explanation if one assumed, as Hoffding did, that the trace a can be re-aroused by a process ${ \pmb a } ^ { \prime } ,$ different from, but similar to ${ \pmb { a } } ,$ and that therefore $\dot { \pmb { a } ^ { \prime } }$ can reproduce b. But without this assumption, which the law of substitution was intended to make unnecessary, this law is unconnected with the main body of associationism, if one means by associationism an explanatory theory and not a mere collection of purely empirical laws.

But even as such an empirical law the law of substitution is false, as follows directly from Lewin's experiments, for he has proved even more than Höffding claimed. To apply Lewin's results to Hoffding's example we may say: if we have seen an apple next to a vase and see the same apple again, then there need arise no tendency towards the reproduction of the vasc. This reproduction will take placc only when the special conditions of the case ensure that the new perception communicates with the old trace. The same is true a fortiori for the case where the apple that we see now is different from the apple that we saw lying by the vase, so that the law of substitution contains within itsclf the still unsolved problem: When does a process communicate with a trace?

The Róle of Attitudes or Sets in Reproduction. To this problem Lewin's experiments contribute an answer of high significance: they prove that such communication may be created by a "set," attitude, intention, or otherwise expressed that forces starting within an Egosystem can be powerful factors in bringing about communication between a process and a trace both of which belong to the environ-

## 584 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

mental field. We had come to the same conclusion before, at the end of the eleventh chapter, when we discussed the attempt to recall a name (p. 525), and at the beginning of this, when we discussed another of Lewin's experiments. Thus Lewin's results demand that kind of Ego-environment hypothesis which, starting from entirely different premises, we have introduced in Chapter VII (p. 333), an hypothesis by which Ego and environment are in dynamic intercourse both in the process of actual present organization and in the accumulation of traces of such organizations.

Before we follow up this idea and discuss the problem of the communication more thoroughly, we must add a few words about the relation of Lewin's work to our theory and a section about other types of associative learning.

Although our theory implies that communication of trace and process, by producing tensions in the trace, is apt to create a force between trace and process in the sense of reproduction, it does not mean, as pointed out before, that such spontaneous reproduction must inevitably follow. In the first place, reproduction would be truly spontaneous only if the process had formed its trace without the co-operation of a set or attitude. This possibility we shall have to assume, as will be shown later. But even when communication takes place, the tension created in the trace system cannot be accepted as explaining the whole process of reproduction as it occurs in memory experiments. The fact that the subject actually pronounces the reproduced items is indeed more than can be derived from our hypothesis. Whether he does or not, must dcpend upon forces extraneous to those between trace and process, i.e., upon attitudes, intentions, sets. And if one includes these aspects cf reproduction, then Lewin's claim that association (or the existence and participation of an organized tracecan never be the motor of any mental activity is perfectly true.

We must, however, go even further than that. Continually, old large trace systems are in communication with present part processes, and yet, in any controlled activity, reproductions that lead away from the goal of that activity occur very rarely, even in the form of mere "knowledge" or thinking about." Kohler (1929, pp. 35 ) has insisted on this point sufficiently for us to pass it over with these few words. But even this does not contradict our theory. For as we know, a controlled activity means an activity under the rule of strong forces, forces partly external and partly internal to the orour discussion in Chapter IX, pp. 418 f.). Compared to these forces the tensions arising in the trace will often be negligible.

OTHER TYPES OF "AsSOCIATIVE LEARNING." The quEStiON may even be legitimately raised whether such tensions in a whole-trace will arise under all conditions when a part process communicates with a part of it. We have so far treated reproduction as though·it were the only effect that a whole-trace could exert upon a new process. But this is far from the truth. And we can choose another type of so-called associative learning to discover a very different effect. The method of nonsense syllables was the contribution of an earlier epoch in psychology—German psychology-to the investigation of learning. Two other methods have since then been introduced and have gradually surpassed the old in the scope of their application, viz., the method of the conditioned reflex, invented in Russia, and the method of the maze, developed in America. Both methods share with the nonsense syllable method the aspect of complete arbitrariness of the items to be connected. The conditional sitmulus can be selccted at random, and similarly the structure of the maze with its different blind alleys and its true path is entirely at the discretion of the experimenter. Nothing in the situation itself demands, say, a bell to be connected with feeding, or the building of the maze according to any one of the principles employcd in the different investigations, just as little as the syllable zut dcmands that the syllable pid follow upon it. We shall not treat the conditioned reflex experiments, because by their very construction they cannot make any direct contribution to our problem. Moreover, the theory of the conditioned reflex has been very searchingly discussed during the last few years, notably by Tolman and Humphrey, so that a new discussion would not advance us very much further.

Maze Experiments. The maze experiments, on the other hand, have, in the hands of ingenious experimenters, acquired a new meaning which is relevant to our present discussion. In the ordinary maze experiment the animal learns the maze in the attempt to reach the food contained in the food box. The progress of learning consists in the animal's obtaining its reward more and mort' quickly and with fewer and fewer errors, i.c., by entering fewer and fewer blind alleys. Learning here is defined by behaviour contnuously approaching an optimal type, it is the steady improvement of one and the same accomplishment, in that sense again similar to the learning of series of nonsense syllables. One can, however. alter the procedure in such a way that during the first part of the "learning period" the accomplishment of the animal is different from that of the second.

Will then the practice in the first accomplishment aid the second one?

"Latent Learning." The best and simplest way would probably be one suggested to me once by Dr. Mintz: put the animal into a maze and let it stay there for, say, a couple of hours without rewarding it. Repeat this a number of times and then introduce food in the food box. Compare the behaviour of such animals with that of a control group which has been trained in the same maze by the usual method, i.e., by having food in the food box from the first day of training. As far as I know this experiment has not yet been performed, but experiments by Blodgett and by Tolman and Honzik, briefly refcrred to in an earlier part of this chapter (p.547), are similar enough to allow a prcdiction of what would happen if it were carried out. The last two authors put rats into a maze and took them out, without feeding thcm, as soon as they reached the exit box, fecding not taking place till two hours later, in their livingcages. After this had been done for ten days, food was introduced on the eleventh. ${ \mathfrak { s o } } _ { \mathfrak { n } }$ the twelfth day they exhibited an enormous drop in both errors and times" (Tolman, p. 52); as a matter of fact their error curve dropped on that day below that of a normal control group which had been running this maze for the same number of days with food in the exit box, whcreas on the preceding day the control group had made far fewer crrors. To express the result in this way is, of course, not correct. For the term error has meaning only for the animal that wants to get quickly to the food box, ic., for the control group and the test group after the cleventh day. Before this day an entry of a blind alley was in no sense an error, except for the cxperimenter who wants to tabulate the resylts. This experiment proves that the activity of exploring the maze with a great number of "errors" is at lcast as advantageous for the desired effect, the quick and errorless reaching of the food box, as the activity of running for that food box. But in the former the difference between the pre-critical and the critical activities is much greater than in the latter; in the former the trace of the older activities has the effct not of reproducing, with modifications, these activities, but of giving rise to new activities. It is therefore highly probable that the experiment suggested by Dr. Mintz would also have a positive result: living in the maze would help the rats to find the food box quickly as soon as they became motivated to run for it.

"Latent Learning" as an Example of a Trace Influence That Is Not Reproduction. Thus we have come across a striking example of a trace-effect which is not reproduction. The trace formed by the non-rewarded runs in the maze becomes a more and more articulated system which forms part of the field in which the later motivated activity takes place, and directs it according to feld structure and motivation. It seems quite unnecessary to assume that the rat will be impelled, in its run for food, to choose a path that leads in a wrong direction simply because it had chosen it in its non- (or differently) motivated activity.

THE GENERAL FIELD-INFLUENCE EXERTED BY A TRACE UPON A PROCESS. So this experiment brings us back to the discussion interrupted a while ago. And we find now that a part process in cominunication with a trace which is part of a larger trace system need not be affected by this trace at all in the sense of reproduction corresponding to the whole trace. The communication may have altogether different efects. It might seem that this conclusion contradicted the theory which we took such great pains to develop, viz., that such communication would set up tensions within the total trace which would exert a force towards reproduction. But this con'radiction disappears as soon as we consider that the cffect of the communication upon the trace must depend upon the nature of the trace. In the case under discussion the trace system influencing the test runs may be not that of the previous run, but that of the maze pattern which, as previously mcntioned (p. 547), arose out of the other traccs. Furthermore not all traces can be so constituted that asymmetrical communication changes thcir stability and thereby gives rise to stresses. Only those where this is the case can cause spontaneous reproduction, and since probably thcy ure in the minority, spontaneous reproduction should, according to our theory, occur still more rarely than would follow from our carlier discussion. And thcrefore Lewin's criticism of this concept becomes the more significant.

To say which traccs are of the one kind, which of the other, ·would require a much better knowledge of traces than wc possess today. The main value of my hypotheses, if they have any, seems to me to lie more in their heuristic than in their explanatory character. They pose problems, problems which an associationistic psychology could never have raised. The only indication of an answcr to our question seems to me this: traces resulting from rote learning are particularly apt to become endowed with tension through communication with part processes and thereby to bc'capable of initiating spontaneous reproduction. It is plausible to connect this with thefc hat hfo o  lat euficnt whereas most other traces must be connected with innumerable other trace systems.

But the discussion of the Tolman-Honzik maze experiment has given us an even more important insight. A trace system may exert influences other than reproduction on the continuation of a process. The influence studied in this experiment was one upon the animal's activity. We can describe it best by saying that the trace developed during its non-rewarded runs influenced its activity in the foodmotivated runs in a manner similar to that in which a maze which the animal could perceive in all or many of its details would. If the animal secs or feels that an alley is blocked at one end it will turn back; if it sces that another alley leads to the lure it will enter it. The Tolman-Honzik experiment and our everyday experience demonstrate that the trace can have a similar effect. What the animal has developed during its "latent lcarning" is a trace of the maze; this trace, being in communication with the present activity, regulates it more or less as the perception of the maze would. Just so, whcn I want a book I leave my chair and turn to the book-case at the side of the room which at the moment is outside my perceptual field. The trace field of the whole room in which I am staying is in communication with my present activity and thereby directs it in such a way that orderly action, started by needs or intentions, becomes possible. Again, dynamically it makes no difference whether the required book stands on my desk within the field of perception or in the book-case at the side.

Why This Theory Is Not Associationistic. But is this not association? Let us sce what this claim would mean. In writing this chapter I was reminded of an experiment on "latent learning." This had become associated with Tolman's book, because I had first read it there. Thcrefore the idca of the expcriment reproduces the idea of the book. This in its turn is associated with the shelf on which I have put it, and therefore the idea of the bookshelf arises. And now? The idea of the bookshelf is associated with many other ideas, e.g., with that of all my cases containing reprints; are they or any other associated ideas reproduced? Not at all. What happens is that I rise from my chair and fetch the book. Has Tolman's book been associated with this activity? If not, why, on purely associationistic principles, do I rise? In this presentation of the associationistic explanation I have disregarded the fact that spontaneous reproduction, on which this whole explanation rests, is a very rare occurrence. Even so, the explanation fails to explain what it set out to. Granted then that my final action requires some other kind of explanation, what of the preceding events? Why does the idea of Tolman's book reproduce the idea of the bookcase and not that of the many seminar evenings on which I discussed it, or that of my review of it, which by "frequency" and emotional intensity should be favoured? Surely it is not chance that at this moment the bookshelf association proved to be the strongest while at other moments entirely different ones would be dominant, occasions at which I would never think of the place of the book, but of its contcnts, or its author, or what not. Certainly I could think of neither of these unless the "Tolmantrace" were connected with all those other traces. But neither is the fact of the connection enough, nor has the connection been proved to be of the type of association. In short, if one calls the explanation of my activity which I gave above an associationistic one, one shirks the issue. Association has unwittingly assumed a meaning which makes it practically synonymous with experience. And a theory based on experience, a genetic theory, is for that very reason a desirable theory. Therefore the great attachment to associationism. But association is far from being synonymous with expcrience. It is one way of coping with experience, one conception to treat experience scientifically. Therefore a criticism of associationism, however negative it may be, is not a rejection of a genetic theory. There are other, and I believe better, ways of treating experience than the concept of association.

A Reference to Older Experiments on Memory. In many respects the preceding discussion of associative learning was incomplete. Its omission of a reference to most of the results reached by the older experiments is due to the fact that their thcoretical mcaning is, to say the least, highly ambiguous. Take the facts expressed in Jost's law: two series of nonsense syllables, A and B, of which A has been learned some time before B and with more repetitions, will rank differently according to the method used in testing them. By the method of paired associates B may be the one better retained, whereas by the saving method A may appear superior. The traditional explanation has been a one-factor explanation, in agreement with the traditional theory which knows only one variable: the strength of association. It says that the average strength of association is greater in A than in B, and therefore it can be relearned more easily, while the individual number of associations which are supraliminal, i.e., which are strong enough to effcct reproduction, is greater in B, accounting for its superiority in the method of paired associates. But such a simple explanation overlooks the dynamics of the situation. There are three problems involved: the effect of the

## 590 LEARNING AND OTHER MEMORY FUNCTIONS

trace on the process once it is in communication with it-this is the equivalent in our terms to the old theory-the case of communication between the present process and the trace, and, thirdly, the effect of new repetitions on the existing trace systems. It seems to me very unlikely that the facts can find their explanation in terms of the first problem alone, but since we lack experimental evidence to decide this point, I shall omit these and numerous other effects.

But our discussion of associative learning was incomplete also because it left the second problem just mentioned unanswered, although we encountered it again and again. It is not, however, a problem specific of associative learning. It was equally obvious in our discussion of the acquisition of skills, and it is of no less importance for the problem of recognition. Therefore, before treating it we shall turn to this new achievement of memory.
