> 来源：Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.)\Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1. Design Thinking as Design Company IDEO’s Way of Working with Design and Innovation

Stories of IDEO’s way of working successfully with product development innovations told by Tom Kelley, the founder’s brother and general manager (Kelley, 2001) and the various persona and roles played by members of the design teams (Kelley, 2005) introduced the company’s work to a broader audience than their local network. The books provided ‘lessons in creativity’ starting from the particular, then generalized to IDEO’s point of view, a ‘design practice’ perspective using their ‘secret formula’ of a blend of methodologies, work culture and infrastructure. The CEO, Tim Brown, labelled the concept as ‘design thinking’, detailing steps in the process (2008), and providing stories to help everyone use IDEO’s methods, particularly business people and social innovators (Brown & Wyatt, 2007).

While Brown’s stories are compelling, there is no published theoretical framework other than his description of the circular process. Naturally there are links between the IDEO discourse of design thinking and the designerly discourses described earlier, even if they are not explicitly spelled out in references. Members of IDEO are all inspired by designers’ work processes that are the grounds for the five designerly discourses, even if they are not all trained as professional designers (on the contrary, ‘pure’ designers are in the minority at the company). Maybe it is the experience of designers and non-designers working with the design process that inspired Brown to suggest that, ‘everybody could do it’ just by following the steps.

While no formal links exist between Palo Alto-headquartered IDEO and Boston-based Design Management Institute (DMI), many articles published by DMI (cf., Lockwood, 2009, 2010) communicate the same intention, to make the practices of designers accessible and meaningful to managers. Most often without theoretical grounding, at best they provide insightful anecdotes or lists of best practices that readers may wish to try for themselves.
