> 来源：Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.)\Design Thinking Past, Present and Possible Futures (Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla Woodilla etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3. Design Thinking as Part of Management Theory

A third use of the term ‘design thinking’ emanates from Richard Boland and Frank Collopy, who are academic researchers and professors in management information systems. Their inspiration came from architect Frank Gehry’s way of working on the new building for Weatherhead School of Management in Cleveland, and subsequently captured in a book of essays by scholars invited to a workshop to celebrate the opening of the building and reflect on ways managers are designers as well and decision makers (Boland & Collopy, 2004b). Boland and Collopy interchangeably use the concept ‘design thinking’ and ‘the design attitude’ (expectations and orientations one brings to a design project; 2004b: 9), thereby pointing less towards design as a way of working or a work process with distinct characteristics (as stressed in the IDEO version) and more towards cognitive characteristics (similar to Martin). Previously in organization and management theory, design had been considered at the organizational level (cf., Romme, 2003).

Boland and Collopy credit Simon with developing a theory of the design attitude for managers, and subsequently distinguish this from a decision attitude. If there is a common foundation for the various essays, it may be found in Simon’s notion of design projects as ‘the urge to change an existing state of affairs into a more preferred one’ (2004b: 10). However, most of the contributors to this more theoretical but yet quite diverse discourse stream are world-renowned scholars who use the design situation as an application of their own frameworks of thinking and theorizing. Boland (2004) himself looks upon organizations in general and states that managing is very similar to designing in more general characteristics: like art, it is all but a rational process.

One insightful comment highlights the extent to which we are limited by our vocabularies, quoting Cooperrider, ‘words are fateful – words make worlds’ (Boland & Collopy, 2004c: 266), hence they conclude the book with suggestions for a new ‘design vocabulary for management’ based on the work of the conference. Yet there seem to be no traces of this new vocabulary reported in business or academic texts, maybe because the sources of individual concepts come from different epistemological orientations.

The legacy of this opportunity to reflect on ‘managing as designing’ is difficult to assess. It may be inferred as one impetus for special journal issues relating design or designing to organization science or development (e.g., Dunbar & Starbuck, 2006; Bate, 2007; Jelinek, Romme & Boland, 2008). Also academic conferences have provided calls or opportunities for scholarly conversations connecting designing with managing, for example, the Academy of Management 2011 Professional Development Workshop ‘Creating Design Thinkers’, the Cambridge Academic Design Management Conference 2011, or the theme of the European Group for Organization Studies 2011 Colloquium ‘Design!?’ Maybe a more robust academic conversation on ‘design thinking’ within the management realm will emerge with time.

## Comparison of the Three Management Discourses of Design Thinking

The management discourses of design thinking can be compared as in Table 2.

Other frameworks exist that synthesize the area ‘design thinking’. Following a literature review concentrating mainly on the practicebased literatures, Hassi and Laakso (2011) concluded that the concept of design thinking in the management discourse consists of three elements: (1) a set of practices, (2) cognitive approaches and (3) mindsets. Rylander (2009) compares the two discourses of ‘design thinking’ and ‘knowledge work’ and considers ‘design thinking’ as practical knowledge, open-ended problems, a social identity of celebrating creativity, and visual forms of dominant sensemaking modes. These statements make the dominant management discourse of ‘knowledge work’ appear purely cognitive and lacking ‘embodied knowledge’ that is so important to designers. Kimbell’s (2011) critical review of the entire literature found three different ways of describing design thinking: (1) as a cognitive style of individual designers engaged in problem solving, (2) as a general theory of design as a field or discipline focused on taming wicked problems, and (3) as an organizational resource for businesses and other organizations in need of innovation. She proposes attending to the situated, embodied routines of designers and offers a useful way to rethink design thinking. Any of these frameworks can be the starting point for further investigation. However, we think it is important to look closely at the discourse roots and maintain epistemological clarity.

<table><tr><td colspan="5">Table 2. Comparison of the Three Management Discourses of Design Thinking</td></tr><tr><td>Originator</td><td>Audience</td><td>Discourse Character</td><td>Academic Connections</td><td>Relation to Practice</td></tr><tr><td>IDEO design company (Tom Kelley &amp; Tim Brown)</td><td>Company managers (potential customers)</td><td>IDEO success cases (written for managers)</td><td>Grounded in experience rather than research Connections to innovation research</td><td>Kelley: How &#x27;we&#x27; (IDEO) do design thinking Brown: how anyone can use design thinking How successful production</td></tr><tr><td>Roger Martin</td><td>Educators (academics &amp; consultants) Company managers</td><td>Success cases from production companies used to illustrate theory development (managerial thinking)</td><td>Grounded in cognitive science &amp; management science Builds on planning theories (wicked problems&#x27;)</td><td>companies do design thhinking How &#x27;any&#x27; company (manager/individual) can do design thinking</td></tr><tr><td>Richard Boland &amp; Fred Collopy</td><td>Academic researchers &amp; educators</td><td>Short essays where established (management) scholars apply their theoretical perspective to the design area</td><td>Grounded in individual researchers&#x27; own theoretical perspectives Inspired by Gehry&#x27;s architectural practice or contact with design</td><td>Design thinking as analogy &amp; alternative</td></tr></table>

## Relation between ‘Designerly Thinking’ and ‘Design Thinking’

## Similarities and Differences

Both designerly thinking and design thinking refer to an ongoing design practice, a reality that is not a discrete and coherent practice, and is far from standardized, but is nevertheless the basis for generalizations, descriptions and theories made in both discourses. They belong to different genres of writing. The designerly discourse is a more scholarly discourse, where the different authors refer to and quote each other, either as followers or in opposition/as alternatives. Two of the design thinking discourses are written for a business or managerial audience, where convention does not require strict referencing and positioning the text in relation to other texts. Consequently, scholars need to treat much of what is written in the design thinking discourse as anecdotal, rather than theoretically or empirically based. Further research may examine the assumptions and connections, but the material itself cannot be taken as the foundation for further research. The third origin of the design thinking discourse – Gehry-inspired and facilitated by Boland and Collopy – uses Simon as the point of theoretical departure, then connects to other organization and management concepts. Boland and Collopy use design thinking not so much with interest or focus on the designers’ way of thinking, or for giving managers inspiration to think like designers, but more to demonstrate that managers already do think like designers (which happens only on a very abstract level).

## What’s left out in Translation

Design thinking can be seen as a translation of designerly thinking into a popularized, management version. As with any translation, nuances of meaning may be left out, and acknowledging these ‘left out dimensions’ is important academic work. We have found two dimensions that are strikingly omitted in translating ‘designerly thinking’ into ‘design thinking’:

1. Design thinking is often equated to creativity: Sometimes the popular version ‘design thinking’ is presented as a way to make managers think more creatively. But being creative is only part of the competence and practice of the designer’s work.

2. Design thinking is often equated to a toolbox: Sometimes the popular versions focus on the designer’s specific methods taken out of context, as tools ready for use, but the person using the tools must have the knowledge and skill – competence that comes with training – to know when to use them.

To talk about design and leaving the designer out is like talking about musicians and leaving the music out: a musician is identified by his or her instrument and the style of music played. Just as there is never a generic ‘musician’, the design thinking discourse is not one but many, as are the designerly discourses. Therefore there is little use in trying to find a single definition or description of the practice of design thinking. To do so would be to concentrate on an elegant model ‘to know’, without the ability to turn it into action through ‘doing’ detailed processes (Pfeffer & Sutton, 1999).

## Possible Futures: How Design Thinking can be Nurtured by Closer Connections with Designerly Thinking

As with many novel ideas and processes promoted by business consultants (such as management by objectives or business process re-engineering), the design thinking discourse will most probably die if it does not acquire a scholarly base that relates more to designerly thinking. Firm academic links will preserve valuable parts of the practice for managerial use and provide designers with fresh insights into how to make connections with the management world. Below we suggest avenues for further research.

Example 1. Teamwork has been an important aspect of IDEO’s work, and accordingly an implicit part of the design thinking discourse as presented by Kelley and Brown. Teamwork is already an important area of research within the management area (e.g., Hackman, 1989), and also an area with research efforts within the designerly discourse (e.g., Stempfle, 2002). Therefore the design thinking discourse would gain from a deeper relation to existing theories of teamwork. For example, we would welcome an empirical study of multidisciplinary teamwork practices, as at IDEO, conducted by established teamwork researchers with connections to both design and management.

Example 2. Design and innovation is another theme within design thinking. Here the non-theoretical but popular discourse of design thinking would benefit from a closer relation with the hermeneutic stream of the designerly thinking discourse. Looking at the whole design process as a matter of meaning creation provides new perspectives on both design and innovation (Verganti, 2009; Jahnke, 2012). We therefore would welcome studies of designers’ meaning creation in the practice of innovation from a designerly point of view.

Example 3. The design thinking discourses build upon a notion that managers’ ways of thinking and problem solving are different from designers. At the same time, Boland and colleagues maintain that managers are quite capable of using designers’ ways of reasoning as well: a statement that assumes that the differences are complex and probably inherit some ambiguity and paradox. As a way to investigate both differences and similarities, the whole design thinking area would gain from close ethnographic research that could replace descriptive anecdotes and build up an academic body of knowledge. One possibility could be situations similar to that at Intuit, as described by Martin (2011), but using an ethnographic approach and an analysis framework that draws from the tradition described by Cross (cf., Cross, 1999). The objective of such a stream of research would be to attempt to understand what is happening naturally in the setting, and to interpret the data gathered in a systematic way to see what implications could be formed from the data.

## Concluding Reflections

As social constructionists we regard an approach that begins with the question, ‘What is design thinking?’ as an essentialist trap. We do not believe that there is a unique meaning of ‘design thinking’, and accordingly we should not look for one. Instead, we look for where and how the concept is used in different situations, both theoretical and practical, and what meaning is given to the concept. In this article we have identified multiple discourses with distinctly different meanings and assumptions given to the concept ‘design thinking’: five scholarly discourses grounded within the design research area, and three discourses within the managerial area, of which two are grounded in management research and one in design practice.

The five designerly discourses are all aware of the others, being followers, alternatives or in clear opposition to each other. There is also some awareness between the three identified management discourses: Martin links to IDEO, the Boland and Collopy-inspired discourses have common ground in Simon, with interpretations that spread in different directions depending on the theoretical tradition of the author.

When it comes to links between the design and management discourses (‘designerly thinking’ and ‘design thinking’) there are few links between them. Out of the three management discourses, two (IDEO and Martin) are linked to design practice by IDEO – but do not refer to academic research within design (even if there must be some connections because both IDEO’s founder and design research come from similar experiences in industrial design education). Within the design discourses, we have located a single reference to the managerial discourse of design thinking – as a ‘business model’ (Piotrowski, 2011).

## The Designerly Ways of Thinking

The five different discourses with different epistemological underpinnings that we refer to collectively as a ‘designerly way of thinking’ each have both forerunners and followers that exist as parallel tracks. Anyone wishing to make an academic contribution therefore needs to have this pluralistic perspective in mind, because without recognizing the plurality and identifying the specific perspective, it is impossible to make an academic contribution. Academic knowledge always needs to take earlier knowledge into consideration, and to build upon a similar epistemology (this holds even for a critique that takes distance from a specific discourse). From an academic perspective, this plurality in discourses within designerly ways of thinking is not a sign of weakness but rather a sign of maturity.

## The Management Discourse of ‘Design Thinking’

The management discourse of ‘design thinking’ is united as a fad, yet there is far from a single meaning. Rather, the concept of design thinking seems to consist of different streams that are united only because they are not analytical. Perhaps those designers and design researchers who are not comfortable with the concept ‘design thinking’ associate it with a more cognitive approach and a distinction between thinking and doing. Conversely, management practitioners like the concept ‘design thinking’ because it gives a label to something that is needed within management, but unless it is articulated, it remains undervalued. The normative descriptions are written with industrial leaders as the target group. Though it is understandable that many people would like a clear-cut definition of design thinking, such a quest for unity is counterproductive for the academic development of the area that we believe it deserves.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Special Issue Guest Editor and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments that greatly improved our paper.

## References

Ambrose, G. and Harris, P. (2010) Basics Design 08: Design Thinking. AVA Publishing, Lausanne.

Bate, P. (2007) Bringing the Design Sciences to Organization Development and Change Management. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 43, 8–11.

Bell, S. (2008) Design Thinking: A Design Approach to the Delivery of Outstanding Service Can Help Put the User Experience First. American Libraries, 39, 44–9.

Birchall, J. (2008) Proctor and Gamble Hires Design Outsider. Financial Times, 21 May [WWW document]. URL http://ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/ 386b4fle-2761-11dd-b7cb-00077b07658.html#axzz1ST9GTonY [accessed on 18 July 2011].

Birchall-Spencer, M. (2010) Companies that Employ Design Thinking will Tap into Innovations, Longevity and Competitive Advantage, says Roger Martin. HR Professional, 27, 51–7.

Boland, R. (2004) Design in the Punctuation of Management Action. In Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (eds.), Managing as Designing. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, pp. 106–12.

Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (eds.) (2004a) Managing as Designing, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (2004b) Design matters for management. In Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (eds.), Managing as Designing. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, pp. 3–18.

Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (2004c) Toward a Design Vocabulary for Management. In Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (eds.), Managing as Designing. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, pp. 265–88.

Bousbaci, R. (2008) ‘Models of Man’ in Design Thinking: The ‘Bounded Rationality’ Episode. Design Issues, 24, 38–52.

Brown, T. (2008) Design Thinking. Harvard Business Review, 86, 84–92.

Brown, T. (2009) Change by Design: How Design Thinking Transforms Organizations and Inspires Innovation. HarperCollins, New York.

Brown, T. and Wyatt, J. (2007) Design Thinking for Social Innovation. Stanford Social Innovation Review, Winter, 30–5.

Bruce, M. and Bessant, J. (2002) Design in Business: Strategic Innovation through Design. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Buchanan, R. (1992) Wicked Problems in Design Thinking. Design Issues, 8, 5–21.

Camillus, J. (2008) Strategy as a Wicked Problem. Harvard Business Review, 86, 98–106.

Collopy, F. (2009) Thinking about ‘Design Thinking’ [WWW document]. URL http://www.fast company.com/blog/fred-collopy/manage-

designing/thinking-about-design-thinking [accessed on 15 July 2011].

Cooper, R., Junginger, S. and Lockwood, T. (2009) Design Thinking and Design Management: A Research and Practice Perspective. Design Management Review, 20, 46–55.

Cross, N. (1999) Design Research: A Disciplined Conversation. Design Issues, 15, 5–10.

Cross, N. (2006) Designerly Ways of Knowing. Springer Verlag, London.

Cross, N. (2011) Design Thinking. Berg, Oxford.

Dell’Era, C. and Bellini, E. (2009) How Can Product Semiotics be Embedded in Product Technologies? The Case of the Italian Wine Industry. Journal of International Product Management, 13, 411–39.

Dorst, K. (1997) Describing Design: A Comparison of Paradigms. Delft Institute of Technology, Delft.

Dunbar, R. and Starbuck, W. (2006) Learning to Design Organizations and Learning from Designing Them. Organization Science, 17, 171–8.

Dunne, D. and Martin, R. (2006) Design Thinking and How it will Change Management Education. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 5, 512–23.

Dym, C., Agigino, A., Eris, O., Frey, D. and Leifer, L. (2005) Engineering Design Thinking, Teaching and Learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94, 103–20.

Feldman, J. and Boult, J. (2005) Third-Generation Design Consultancies: Designing Culture for Innovation. Design Management Review, 16, 40–7.

Fraser, H. (2007) The Practice of Breakthrough Strategies by Design. Journal of Business Strategy, 28, 66–74.

Galle, P. and Kovács, L. (1996) Replication Protocol Analysis: A Method for the Study of Real-World Design Thinking. Design Studies, 17, 181–200.

Hackman, J. (1989) Groups that Work: [and those that don’t]: Creating Conditions for Effective Teamwork. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.

Hassi, L. and Laakso, M. (2011) Conceptions of Design Thinking in the Management Discourse. European Academy of Design Biannual Conference, Porto, Portugal.

Hatchuel, A. (2002) Towards Design Theory and Expandable Rationality: The Unfinished Program of Herbert Simon. Journal of Management and Governance, 5, 260–73.

Hatchuel, A. and Weill, B. (2003) A New Approach of Innovatve Design: An Introduction to C-K Theory. International Conference of Engineering Design, Stockholm, Sweden.

Ho, C. (2001) Some Phenomena of Problem Decomposition Startegy for Design Thinking: Differences between Novices and Experts. Design Studies, 22, 27–45.

Holloway, M. (2009) How Tangible is your Strategy? How Design Thinking can Turn your Strategy into Reality. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 57–69.

Jahnke, M. (2012) Revisiting Design as a Hermeneutic Practice: An Investigation of Paul Ricoeur’s Critical Hermeneutics. Design Issues, 28, 20–30.

Jahnke, M. and Hansson, L. (2010) Innovation of Meaning through Design: An Analysis of a Gender Bending Design Process. Design Research Journal, 2, 25–32.

Jelinek, M., Romme, G. and Boland, R. (2008) Introduction to the Special Issue: Organization Studies as a Science for Design: Creating Collaborative Artifacts and Research. Organization Studies, 29, 317–29.

Johansson, U. and Woodilla, J. (2009) Creating a Synergistic Dialogue among Design Thinking, Strategy and Innovation. Design Research Journal, 2, 29–33.

Johansson, U. and Woodilla, J. (2010) How to Avoid Throwing the Baby out with the Bathwater: An Ironic Perspective on Design Thinking. European Group for Organization Studies Colloquium, Lisbon, Portugal.

Junginger, S. (2007) Learning to Design: Giving Purpose to Heart, Hand and Mind. Journal of Business Strategy, 28, 59–65.

Kelley, T. (2001) The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from IDEO, America’s Leading Design Firm. Doubleday, New York.

Kelley, T. (2005) The Ten Faces of Innovation. Random House, New York.

Kimbell, L. (2011) Rethinking Design Thinking: Part I. Design and Culture, 3, 285–306.

Kotler, P. and Rath, G. (1984) Design – a Powerful but Neglected Strategic Tool. Journal of Business Strategy, 5, 16–21.

Krippendorff, K. (2006) The Semantic Turn: A New Foundation for Design. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL.

Lawson, B. (2006 [1980]) How Designers Think: The Design Process Demyistfied, 4th edn. Architectual Press, Oxford.

Leong, B. and Clark, H. (2003) Culture-Based Knowledge towards New Design Thinking and Practice – A Dialogue. Design Issues, 19, 48–58.

Leidtka, J. (2000) In Defense of Strategy as Design. California Management Review, 42, 8–30.

Leidtka, J. (2010) Business Strategy and Design: Can this Marriage be Saved? Design Management Review, 21, 6–11.

Leidtka, J. and Ogilvie, T. (2011) Designing for Growth: A Design Thinking Toolkit for Managers. Columbia University Press, New York.

Leidtka, J. and Ogilvie, T. (2012) Helping Business Managers Discover their Appetite for Design Thinking. Design Management Review, 23, 6–13.

Liu, Y.-T. (1996) Is Designing One Search or Two? A Model of Design Thinking involving Symbolism and Connectionism. Design Studies, 17, 435–49.

Lockwood, T. (2009) Frameworks of Design Thinking (Editor Introduction). Design Management Journal, 4, 3.

Lockwood, T. (ed.) (2010) Design Thinking: Integrating Innovation, Customer Experience and Brand Value. Allworth Press, New York.

Louridas, P. (1999) Design as Bricolage: Anthropology Meets Design Thinking. Design Studies, 20, 517–35.

Martin, R. (2007a) Design and Business, Why Can’t We Be Friends? Journal of Business Strategy, 28, 6–12.

Martin, R. (2007b) The Opposable Mind: How Successful Leaders Win through Integrative Thinking. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Martin, R. (2009) The Design of Business: Why Design Thinking is the Next Competitive Advantage. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Martin, R. (2011) The Innnovation Catalysts. Harvard Business Review, 89, 82–7.

McCullagh, K. (2006) Strategy for the Real World. Design Management Review, 17, 48–55.

Melles, G., Howard, Z. and Thompson-Whiteside, S. (2012) Teaching Design Thinking: Expanding Horizons in Design Education. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 31, 162–6.

Nussbaum, B. (2011) Design Thinking is a Failed Experiment. So What’s Next? [WWW document]. URL http://fastcodesign.com/1663558/beyonddesign-thinking [accessed on 15 July 2011].

Olson, E., Cooper, R. and Slater, R. (1998) Design Strategy and Competitive Advantage. Business Horizons, 41, 55–61.

Oxman, R. (1999) Educating the Designerly Thinker. Design Studies, 20, 105–22.

Oxman, R. (2004) Think-Maps: Teaching Design Thinking in Design Education. Design Studies, 25, 63–91.

Pfeffer, J. and Sutton, R. (1999) Knowing ‘What’ is not Enough: Turning Knowledge into Action. Califorinia Management Review, 42, 83–108.

Piotrowski, C. (2011) Problem Solving and Critical Thinking for Designers. John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.

Rittel, H. and Webber, M. (1973) Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning. Policy Sciences, 5, 155–69.

Romme, G. (2003) Making a Difference: Organization as Design. Organization Sciences, 14, 558–73.

Rowe, P. (1987) Design Thinking. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Rylander, A. (2009) Design Thinking as Knowledge Work: Epistemological Foundations and Practical Implications. Design Management Journal, 4, 7–19.

Sato, S., Lucente, S., Meyer, D. and Mrazek, D. (2010) Design Thinking to make Organization Change and Development more Responsive. Design Management Review, 21, 44–52.

Schön, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action. Basic Books, Cambridge, MA.

Schön, D. and Wiggins, G. (1992) Kinds of Seeing in Designing. Creativity and Innovation Management, 1, 68–74.

Simon, H. (1969) The Sciences of the Artificial, 1st edn. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Simon, H. (1996) The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd edn. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Stempfle, J. (2002) Thinking in Design Teams – An Analysis of Team Communication. Design Studies, 23, 473–96.

Stevens, J. and Moultrie, J. (2011) Aligning Strategy and Design Perspectives: A Framework of Design’s Strategic Contributions. The Design Journal, 14, 475–500.

Szabo, M. (2010) Design Thinking in Legal Practice Management. Design Management Review, 21, 44–6.

Tischler, L. (2009) Ideo’s David Kelley on ‘Design Thinking’ [WWW document]. URL http://www. fastcompany.com/magazine/132/a-designertakes-on-his-biggestchallenge-ever.html [accessed on 15 July 2011].

Uehira, T. and Kay, C. (2009) Using Design Thinking to Improve Patient Experiences in Japanese Hospitals: A Case Study. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 6–12.

Verganti, R. (2009) Design-Driven Innovation. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.

Wang, S. and Wang, H. (2011) Teaching Design Thinking through Case Analysis: Joint Analytical Process. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, 9, 113–18.

Ward, A., Runcie, E. and Morris, L. (2009) Embedding Innovation: Design Thinking for Small Enterprises. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 78–84.

Wong, V. (2009) How Business is Adopting Design Thinking. BusinessWeek.com [WWW document]. URL http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/ content/sep2009/id20090930\_853305.htm [accessed on 9 February 2012].

Wylant, B. (2010) Design Thinking and the Question of Modernity. The Design Journal, 13, 217–31.

Ulla Johansson-Sköldberg is the Torsten and Wanja Söderberg Professor of Design Management and founder of the Business and Design Lab, a co-operation between the School of Design and Crafts and the School of Business, Economics and Law at Gothenburg University. Her research interests include gender, methodology, critical management, art and management and design management.

Jill Woodilla is a Visiting Professor at the School of Business, Economics and Law, University of Gothenburg. Her ironic perspective provides her with a critical view of the multiple realities of any situation, Her research interests include the theoretical underpinnings of design management, varieties of organizational discourse and innovative pedagogy.

Mehves Cetinkaya is writing her PhD dissertation on the effects of financial investments made in design in large companies and how that affects companies’ brand recognition levels. Her general research interests cover design and branding relationships in SMEs and large companies, design and innovation, and design thinking.

## Appendix A. Literature Demographics (Figure 1): Categorized Articles, Books and Presentations

## DESIGNERLY THINKING

<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td>1-Creation of artefacts</td><td>Book</td><td>Simon, H. (1969) The Sciences of the Artificial. MIT Press.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">1-Creation of artefacts &amp; 2-Reflexive Practice</td><td>Prof Jnl</td><td>Vogel, C. (2009) Notes on the Evolution of Design Thinking: A Work in Progress. Design Management Revier, 20, 1627.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Dorst, K. and Dijkhuis, J. (1995) Comparing Paradigms for Describing Design Activity. Design Studies, 16, 26174.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Liu, Y, (1996). Is Designing One Search or Two? A Model of Design Thinking involving Symbolism and Connectionism. Design Issues, 17, 43549.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">1-Creation of artefacts &amp; 5-Creation of Meaning 2-Reflexive Practice</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Louridas, P. (1999) Design as Bricolage: Anthropology Meets Design Thinking. Design Studies, 20, 51735.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Rylander, A. (2009). Design Thinking as Knowledge Work: Epistemological Foundations and Practical Implications.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Design Management Journal, 5, 719. Schön, D. (1988) Designing: Rules, Types and Words. Design Studies, 9, 18190.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td>Schön, D. &amp; Wiggins, G. (1992) Kinds of Seeing and their Functions in Designing. Design Studies, 13, 13556.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Book Books.</td><td>Schön, D. (1984) The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think In Action. Basic</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>2-Reflexive Practice &amp;</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Schön, D. (1986) The Design Studio: An Exploration of Its Traditions and Potentials. Intl Specialized Book Service Inc. Bousbaci, R. (2008) “Models of Man&#x27; in</td><td>Conceptual Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>5-Creation of Meaning</td><td></td><td>Design Thinking: The &#x27;Bounded Rationality&#x27; Episode. Design Issues, 24, 3852</td><td></td></tr></table>

## Appendix A. Continued

## DESIGNERLY THINKING

<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="7">3-Problem Solving Activity</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Buchanan, R. (1992) Wicked Problems in Design Thinking. Design Issues, 8, 521.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ho, C. (2001) Some Phenomena of Problem Decomposition Strategy for Design Thinking: Differences between Novices and Experts. Design Studies, 22, 2745.</td><td>Empirical</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Owen, C. (2007) Design Thinking: Notes on its Nature and Use. Design Research Quarterly, 2, 1627.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Oxman, R. (2004) Think-Maps: Teaching Design Thinking in Design Education. Design Studies, 25, 6391. Whyte, J., Ewenstein, B., Hales, M &amp; Tidd, J.</td><td>Design Education Empirical</td></tr><tr><td>41, 7492.</td><td>(2008) Visualizing Knowledge in Project-Based Work. Long Range Planning,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Book</td><td>Ambrose, G. &amp; Harris, P. (2010) Basics Design: How-to Design Thinking. AVA Publishing. Shamiyeh, M. (Ed.) (2010) Creating Desired</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Architecture. Conf</td><td>Futures: Solving Complex Business Problems with Design Thinking. Birkhäuser</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Prsnt</td><td>Owen, C. (2005) Design Thinking. What It Is. Why It Is Different. Where It Has New Value. International Conference on Design Research and Education for the Future, the Gwangju Design Biennale.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>3-Problem Solving</td><td>Prof Jnl Report</td><td>Junginger, S. (2007) Learning to Design: Giving Purpose to Heart, Hand and Mind. Journal of Business Strategy, 28, 5965. Owen, C. (2006) Design Thinking: Driving</td><td>Design Education for Management</td></tr><tr><td>Activity 3-Problem</td><td></td><td>Innovation. The Business Process Management Institute, White Paper, September.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Solving Activity &amp; 4-Way of</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Dörner, D. (1999) Approaching Design Thinking Research. Design Studies, 20, 40715. Buchanan, R (Ed.) and Margolin, V. (Ed.)</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Reasoning 3-Problem</td><td>Book</td><td>(1995) Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies. University of Chicago Press.</td><td>Conceptual Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Solving Activity &amp; 5-Creation of Meaning</td><td></td><td>Acad Jnl Wylant, B. (2008) Design Thinking and the Experience of Innovation. Design Issues, 24, 314.</td><td></td></tr></table>

## DESIGNERLY THINKING

## Appendix A. Continued

<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td>4-Way of Reasoning</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Carmel-Gilfilen, C. and Portillo, M. (2010). Developmental Trajectories in Design Thinking: An Examination of Criteria. Design Studies, 31,</td><td>Empirical</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="8"></td><td></td><td>7491. Cross, N. (1990) The Nature and Nurture of Design Ability. Design Studies, 11, 12740.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Dorst, K. and Cross, N. (1999) Creativity in the Design Process: Co-Evolution of ProblemSolution. Design Studies, 22, 42537.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>181200.</td><td>Galle, P. And Kovacs, L. (1996) Replication Protocol Analysis: A Method for the Study of Real-World Design Thinking. Design Studies, 17,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gloppen, J. (2009) Perspectives on Design Leadership and Design Thinking and How They Relate to European Service Industries. Design Management Journal, 4, 3347.</td><td>Case</td></tr><tr><td>Studies, 15, 15874</td><td>Goldschmidt, G. (1994) On Visual Design Thinking: the Vis Kids of Architecture. Design</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>One. Design Studies, 16, 189209.</td><td>Goldtschmidt, G. (1995) The Designer as a Team of Stempfle, J. &amp; Badke-Schaub, P. (2002) Thinking in</td><td>Conceptual Conceptual &amp;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Design Teams  An Analysis of Team Communication. Design Studies, 23, 47396. Taura, T, Yoshimi, T. &amp; Ikai, T. (2002) Study of</td><td>Empirical Empirical</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gazing Points in Design Situation: A Proposal and Practice of an Analytical Method Based on the Explanation of Design Activities. Design</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>Book</td><td>Studies, 23, 16585. Cross, N. (Ed.) (1992) Research in design thinking. Delft Univ Press.</td><td>Anthology</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Lawson, B. (2005) How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified, 4th edn. Architectural Press.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">5-Creation of Book Meaning</td><td></td><td>Rowe, P. (1991) Design Thinking. MIT Press. Thackara, J. (1997) Winners!: How Today&#x27;s Successful Companies Innovate by Design. Gower Pub Co.</td><td>Conceptual Case</td></tr><tr><td>Conf Prsnt</td><td>Johansson, U. &amp; Woodilla, J. (2009) Towards an Epistemelogical Merger of Design Thinking,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Strategy and Innovation. 8th European Academy Of Design Conference Krippendorff, K. (2005) The Semantic Turn: A New</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Foundation for Design. CRC Press. Verganti, R. (2009) Design Driven Innovation: Changing the Rules of Competition by Radically Innovating What Things Mean. Harvard Business</td><td>Conceptual &amp; Case</td></tr></table>

## Appendix A. Continued

## DESIGNERLY THINKING

<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">No Specific Category of Designerly Thinking</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Leong, B. &amp; Clark, H. (2003) Culture-Based Knowledge Towards New Design Thinking and Practice  A Dialogue. Design Issues, 19, 4858.</td><td>Personal Experience</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Papantonopoulos, S. (2004) How System Designers Think: A Study of Design Thinking in Human Factors Engineering. Ergonomics, 47,152848.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">No Specific Category</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Senturer, A. &amp; Istek. C. (2000) Discourse as Representation of Design Thinking and Beyond: Considering the Tripod of Architecture  Media, Education, &amp; Practice. Journal of Art &amp; Design</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Book</td><td>Education, 19, 7285. LeMasson, P., Weil, B. and Hatchuel, A. (2005) Strategic Management of Innovation and Design.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cambridge University Press. Margolin, V. (Ed.) and Buchanan, R. (ed.) (1996) The Idea of Design. MIT Press. Wigum, K. (2009) Radical Design Thinking: Thoughts</td><td>Anthology How-to</td></tr></table>

## DESIGN THINKING

<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">1-IDEO&#x27;s Way of Working</td><td>Acad Jnl Book</td><td>Callaghan, E. (2008). Personalities of Design Thinking. Design Management Journal, 4, 2032. Berger, W. (2010) CAD Monkeys, Dinosaur Babies,</td><td>Conceptual Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>and T-Shaped People: Inside the World of Design Thinking and How It Can Spark Creativity and Innovation. Penguin. Brown, T. (2009). Change by Design: How Design</td><td>&amp; Case How-to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Thinking Transforms Organizations and Inspires Innovation. HarperBusiness. Esslinger, H. (2009) A Fine Line: How Design</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Strategies are Shaping the Future of Business. Jossey-Bass.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Gaynor, G. (2002) Innovation by Design: What It Takes To Keep Your Company on the Cutting Edge. AMACOM.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td></td><td>Kelley, T. with Littman, J. (2001) The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from IDEO, America&#x27;s Leading Design Firm. Crown Business.</td><td>Case-based</td></tr><tr><td>Throughout Your Organization. Doubleday.</td><td>Kelley, T. with Littmann, J. (2005) The Ten Faces of Innovation: IDEO&#x27;s Strategies for Defeating the Devil&#x27;s Advocate and Driving Creativity</td><td>Case-based</td></tr></table>

## Appendix A. Continued

DESIGN THINKING
<table><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="7"></td><td>Prof Jnl</td><td>Brown, T. (2008) Design Thinking. Harvard Business Review, 86, 8496.</td><td>How-to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Brown, T. and Wyatt, J. (2010). Design Thinking for Social Innovation. Stanford Social Innovation Review, pp. 315.</td><td>How-to</td></tr><tr><td>1624.</td><td>Lockwood, T. (2010) Design Thinking in Business: An Interview with Gianfranco Zaccai. Design Management Review, 21,</td><td>Case</td></tr><tr><td>21, 369.</td><td>McCullagh, K. (2006). Stepping Up: Design Thinking Has Uncovered Real Opportunities. Design Management Revier, Porcini, M. (2009) Your New Design Process</td><td>Case</td></tr><tr><td>Sato, S. (2009) Beyond Good: Great</td><td>Is Not Enough  Hire Design Thinkers! Design Management Revier, 20, 618.</td><td>Case-based Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Business Strategy, 30, 409.</td><td>Innovations through Design. Journal of Sato, S., Lucente, S., Meyer, D. &amp; Mrazek, D. (2010) Design Thinking to Make</td><td>Conceptual &amp; Case</td></tr><tr><td>Review, 21, 4252.</td><td>Organization Change and Development More Responsive. Design Management Uehira, T. &amp; Kay, C. (2009) Using Design Thinking to Improve Patient Experiences in</td><td>Empirical</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Japanese Hospitals: A Case Study. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 612. Ward, A, Runcie, E. &amp; Morris, L. (2009). Embedding Innovation: Design Thinking</td><td></td><td>Case-based</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">1-IDEO&#x27;s Way of Working &amp; 2-Skill for Managers 2-NecessarySkill for Practicing Managers</td><td></td><td>for Small Enterprises. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 7884. Lockwood, T. (Ed.) (2009) Design Thinking:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Book</td><td>Integrating Innovation, Customer Experience, and Brand Value. Allworth Press. Acad Jnl Beckman, S. &amp; Barry, M. (2007) Innovation as</td><td>Anthology Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>a Learning Process: Embedding Design Thinking. California Management Review, 50, 2556 Dunne, D. and Martin, R. (2006) Design</td><td>Conceptual &amp;</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Thinking and How It Will Change Management Education: An Interview and Discussion. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 5, 51223.</td><td>Promotional</td></tr><tr><td>10715.</td><td>Oster, G. (2008) Derailing Design Thinking. International Journal of Leadership Studies, 4,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr></table>

## Appendix A. Continued

DESIGN THINKING
<table><tr><td></td><td>Stream Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="9"></td><td>Book</td><td>Martin, R. (2009) The Design of Business: Why Design Thinking is the Next Competitive Advantage. Harvard Business School Press.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Neumeier, M. (2008) The Designful Company: How to Build a Culture of Nonstop Innovation. Peachpit Press.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Prahalad, D. and Sawhney, R. (2010). Predictable Magic: Unleash the Power of Design Strategy to Transform Your Business. Pearson Prentice Hall.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Prof Jnl</td><td>Bell, S. (2008) Design Thinking: A Design Approach To The Delivery Of Outstanding Service Can Help Put the User Experience First. American Libraries, 39, 449.</td><td>Promotional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Birchell-Spencer, M. (2010) Companies That Employ Design Thinking Will Tap into Innovations, Longevity and Competitive Advantage, says Roger Martin. HR Professional, 27, 517.</td><td>Promotional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Carr, S., Halloday, A., King, A., Leidtka, J., and Lockwood, T. (2010). The Influence of Design Thinking in Business: Some Preliminary Observations.</td><td>Empirical</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Design Management Revier, 21, 5863. Clark, K. and Smith, R. (2008) Unleashing the Power of Design Thinking. Design Management Review, 19, 815.</td><td>Promotional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Cooper, R., Junginger, S. and Lockwood, T. (2009).</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Review, 20, 4655.</td><td>Design Thinking and Design Management: A Research and Practice Perspective. Design Management</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Drews, C. (2009) Unleashing the Full Potential of Design Thinking as a Business Method. Design</td><td>Empirical &amp; Promotional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Management Review, 20, 3844. Fraser, H. (2009) Designing Business: New Models for</td><td>How-to</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Success. Design Management Review, 20, 5665. Hackett, J. (2009) Innovation is Good, Fitness is Better.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 8590. Holloway, M. (2009) How Tangible is your Strategy? How Design Thinking can Turn your Strategy into</td><td>Case</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Reality. Journal of Business Strategy, 30, 506. Leavy, B. (2010) Design Thinking  A New Mental Model of Value Innovation. Strategy &amp; Leadership, 38,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>514. Martin, R. (2010) Design thinking: achieving insights via the 'knowledge funnel'. Strategy &amp; Leadership, 38,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3741. Merholtz, P. (2010). Why Design Thinking Won't Save</td><td>Critique</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>You. Harvard Business Review, 88, 18. Szabo, M. (2010) Design Thinking in Legal Practice Management. Design Management Review, 21, 4446.</td><td>Promotional</td></tr><tr><td>Stream</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">3-Part of Management Theory</td><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Romme, G. (2004) Action Research, Emancipation and Design Thinking. Journal of Community &amp; Applied Social psychology, 14,</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td>Book</td><td>4959. Boland, R. and Collopy, F. (eds.) (2004) Managing as Designing. Stanford Business Books.</td><td>Conceptual</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">3-Part of Management Theory No specific category</td><td>Book</td><td>Rasmus, D. (2010) Management by Design: Applying Design Principles to the Work</td><td>How-to</td></tr><tr><td>Acad Jnl</td><td>Experience. Wiley. Lockwood, T. (2009) Frameworks of Design Thinking. Design Management Journal, 4, 3.</td><td>Editor Introduction</td></tr><tr><td>Prof Jnl</td><td>Lockwood, T. (2009). Transition: How to Become a More Design-Minded Organization. Design Management Review, 20, 2837.</td><td>Editor Introduction</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Walton, T. (2010) Insights on Business and Design Thinking. Design Management Review, 21, 3.</td><td>Editor Introduction</td></tr></table>

NOT CLASSIFIED INTO EITHER DESIGNERLY THINKING OR DESIGN THINKING
<table><tr><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">A Jn</td><td>Brereton, M. and McGarry, B. (2000). An observational study of how objects support engineering design thinking and communication: implications for the design of</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td>tangible media. CHI&#x27;00. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems Bross, J., Acar, A., Schilf, P. And Meinel, C. (2009) Spurring Design Thinking through Educational Weblogging. Proceedings of the</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td>International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering. Cao, Q. and Protzen, J-P. (1999). Managing Design Information: Issue-Based Information</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td>Systems and Fuzzy Reasoning System. Design Studies, 20, 34362. Casakin, H., Davidovitch, N, and Roberta, M. (2010). Creative Thinking as a Predictor of</td><td>Design Education</td></tr><tr><td>Creative Problem Solving in Architectural Design Students. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts, 4, 3135. Eckert, C. and Martin, S. (2000) Sources of Inspiration: A Language of Design. Design Studies, 21, 52338.</td><td>Not relevant</td></tr></table>

## Appendix A. Continued

NOT CLASSIFIED INTO EITHER DESIGNERLY THINKING OR DESIGN THINKING
<table><tr><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Li, M. (2002) Fostering Design Culture Through Cultivating the User-Designers&#x27; Design Thinking and Systems Thinking. Systemic Practice and Action Research, 15, 385410.</td><td>Article not available</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Maier, J. &amp; Fadel, G. (2009) Affordance Based Design: A Relational Theory for Design. Research in Engineering Design, 20, 237.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Morozumi, M., Shimokawa, Y. &amp; Homma, R. (2002). Schematic Design System for Flexible and Multi-Aspect Design Thinking. Automation in Construction, 11, 14759.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Nagai, Y. &amp; Noguchi, H. (2003) An Experimental Study on the Design Thinking Process Started from Difficult Keywords: Modeling the Thinking Process of Creative Design. Journal of Engineering Design, 14, 42937.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Oxman, R. (2002) The Thinking Eye: Visual Re-Cognition in Design Emergence. Design Studies, 23, 13564.</td><td>Not relevant</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Smith, G. &amp; Browne, G. (1993) Conceptual Foundations of Design Problem Solving. Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 23, 120919.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Tovey, M. (1986) Thinking Styles and Modellng Systems. Design Studies, 7, 2030.</td><td>Article not available</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Ulusoy, Z. (1999) To Design Versus to Understand Design: The Role of Graphic Representations and</td><td>Design Education</td></tr><tr><td>Studies, 21, 50522.</td><td>Verbal Expressions. Design Studies, 20, 12330. VanDerLugt, R. (2000). Developing a Graphic Tool for</td><td>Not relevant</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Creative Problem Solving in Design Groups. Design Vyas, K. (2006). Design History: An Alternative</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Engineering Design, 20, 111.</td><td>Approach. Design Issues, 22, 2734. Yang, M. (2009) Observations on Concept Generation and Sketching in Engineering Design. Research in</td><td>Not relevant Engineering</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td>Not Classified</td><td>Medium</td><td>Reference</td><td>Focus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Book</td><td>Blaszxyl, R. (2002) Imagining consumers: Design and innovation from Wedgewood to Corning (Studies in industry and society). The Johns Hopkins University</td><td>Not relevant (Design)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td></td><td>Press. Eris, O. (2004) Effective Inquiry for Innovative Engineering Design: From Basic Principles to Application. Springer.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Jones, A. (2008) The Innovation Acid Test: Growth through Design and Differentiation. Triarchy Press.</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Mitchell, T. (1996). New Thinking in Design: Conversations on Theory and Practice. Wiley.</td><td>s Design</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5"></td><td rowspan="5">Conf Prsnt</td><td>English, S. (2006) Design thinking  value innovation - deductive reason and the designers choice. Proceedings of DRS2006 Design</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td>Research Society. Eris, O. (2003) Asking Generative Design Questions: A Fundamental Cognitive</td><td>Engineering</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanism in Design Thinking. International Conference on Engineering Design ICED 03 Stockholm. Janis, N. (2000) Design as a framework for</td><td>Education</td></tr><tr><td>innovative thinking and learning: how can design thinking reform education? IDATER Conference, Loughborough. Oxman, R. (2006). Digital Design Thinking: In the</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>New Media is the New Pedagogy. CAADRIA, Kumamoto, Japan. Wong, C. (200) Some Phenomena of Design</td><td>Design Education Engineering</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Prof Jnl</td><td>Thinking in the Concept Generation Stage Using Computer Media. Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Computer Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia Singapore, pp. 25563</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Teaching Case</td><td>Kotler, P. and Rath, A. (1994) Design: A Powerful but Neglected Strategic Tool. Journal of Business Strategy, 5, 1621. Feinberg, B. and Thomke, S. (2009) Design Thinking and Innovation at Apple. Harvard</td><td>Article not available Case</td></tr></table>

Note: Shaded references are used in the article text.  
Acad Jnl = Academic or scholarly peer reviewed journal  
Prof Jnl = Professional or practitioner journal  
Conf Prsnt = Peer reviewed conference presentation

Appendix B. Literature Demographics: Newspaper, Magazine and Web/Blog Posts (Not Classified)

Magazine Articles

Anon. (2004) Audi Design Foundation. Design Week, 19(Apr30), 4.

Anon. (2007, Oct5) Sustaining the Dream. BusinessWeek, p17.

Anon. (2007) Nussbaum says design thinking must be integral part of business. Design Week, 22(27), 4

Anon. (2008) Design Thinking + Doing. Creativity, 16(11), 28.

Anon. Priestman Goode. Design Week, 19(Sep30), 14.

Armit, G, (2010, Jun3) Beyond Design Thinking: Why Hybrid Design Is the Next New Thing. FastCompany http://www.fastcom pany.com/1656288/beyond-design-think ing-why-hybriddesign-is-the-next-newthing

Boult, J. (2008) Inspired. Design Week, 23(15), 10.

Brady, D. (2007, Mar6) Taking On the Global Food Crisis. BusinessWeek, p4.

Brown, (T. 2007, Dec19) Strategy by Design. FastCompany http://www.fastcompany. com/magazine/95/design-strategy.html

Brunner, R. (2009, Jun6) Design Is Too Important to Be Left to the Thinkers FastCompany. http://www.fastcompany.com

Chan, D. (2010, Sep1) Hybrid Thinking: Designed Thinking. http://catalystsdr. com/2009/09/hybrid-thinking-designedthinking

Cooperrider, D. (2008). Sustainable Innovation. BizEd Jul/Aug, 32–38.

Dziersk, M. (2008, Jul8) Design Thinking . . . What is That? FastCompany http://www. fastcompany.com/resources/design/ dziersk/design-thinking-083107.html

Dziersk, M. (2010, Apr10) Why Design Thinking Is the Next Competitive Advantage. FastCompany http://www.fastcompany. com/1628107/a-worthy-read

FastCompayStaff (2007, Dec19) The Power of Design. http://www.fastcompany.com/ magazine/95/open\_design-index.html

Grace, R. (2010) ‘Design thinking’ drives Dow Corning change. Plastics News, 21(44), 12.

Hempel, J. (2007) How Venture Philanthropists Use Design Thinking To Help Solve Real-World Problems. Business Week, Mar 12, pp.8–13.

Katayama,L. (2010, Sep8) 5 Ways iPad’s Pulse App Creators Applied Design Thinking to Their Business. FastCompany http://www. fastcompany.com/1687400/5-design-tipsfrom-ipads-pulseapp-creators-andstanford-design-school

Kunur, P. (2008) Design Thinking in Government. Creativity, 16(11), 36.

Lee, L. (2008, Feb14) Innovation at Risk. BusinessWeek, p15.

Lovett, G. (2009) Ideo collaborative publicsector pilot heads for roll-out. Design Week, 24(10), 7.

Lowe, C. (2005) The NHS needs design. Design Week, 20(3), 13.

McConnon, A. (2006, Nov6) Want a Master of Design with That? Business Week, p.15.

Merritt, J. & Lavelle, L. (2005, Aug1) Tomorrow’s B-School? It might be a D-School. BusinessWeek, p80–81.

Rae, J. (2008, Jul29) P&G Changes Its Game. BusinessWeek, p9.

Richardson, A. (2010) Independent touch. Design Week, 25(35), 17.

West, H. (2007, Oct5) The Cross-Discipline Design Imperative. BusinessWeek, p16.

Tischler,L. (2009, Jan14) Ideo’s David Kelley on ‘Design Thinking’. http://www.fastcom pany.com/magazine/132/a-designertakes-on-his-biggestchallenge-ever.html

Walters, H. (2009, Dec15) Inside the Design Thinking Process. BusinessWeek, p15.

West, H. (2007, Oct5) The Cross-Discipline Design Imperative. BusinessWeek, p16.

Newspaper Articles

Anderson, L. (2008, Dec1) All the world’s a stage for MBA students. http://www. financialtimes.com

Baker, D. (2007, Jun16) Thinking illustrated. http://www.financialtimes.com

Birchall, J. (2008, Apr, 4) P&G appoints design outsider. http://www.financialtimes.com

Birhal, J. (2008, May22) Procter & Gamble hires design outsider. http://www.financialtimes. com

Knight, R. (2010, Sep13) Schools learn from the world of design. http://www.financial times.com

Martin, R. (2010, Jan11) MBA world needs to broaden its horizons. http://www.financial times.com

Sunshine, B. (2008, Sep 27) On show. http:// www.financialtimes.com

Thornhill, J. (2006, Jan27) Workshop 4: Building a culture of innovation. http:// www.financialtimes.com

Witzel, M (2009, Oct15) From mystery to system in innovation. http://www. financialtimes.com

## Web & Blog Posts

Amit, G. (2009, Nov 28) Making sense of Design Thinking: Three definitions, two problems and one big question. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/gadi-amit/ new-deal/making-sense-designthinkingthree-definitions-two-problems-and-onebig-ques

Barratt, J. (2009, Aug10) A Plea for More Critical Thinking in Design, Please. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/john-barratt/ design-day/plea-more-criticalthinkingdesign-please

Breen, B. (2007, Aug23) Design Thursday: The Buzz Around ‘Design Thinking’. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/bill-breen/ design-thursday-buzz-arounddesignthinking

Cannell, M. (2009, Nov17) Can Design Thinking Solve Your Problems and Make You Happier? http://www.fastcompany.com/ blog/michael-cannell/cannell/can-design thinking-be-used-solve-personal-problems

Cannell, M. (2009, Oct 22) 5 Ways Design Thinking Can Raise the Collective IQ of Your Business. http://www.fastcompany. com/blog/michael-cannell/cannell/ managementwars-design-thinkingpolarizing-force-your-office

Collopy, F. (20007, Jun7) Lessons Learned – Why the Failure of Systems Thinking Should Inform the Future of Design Thinking. http://www.fastcompany.com/blog/

fred-collopy/manage-designing/lessons learned-why-failure-systems-thinkingshould-inform-future

Collopy, F. (2009, Jul9) Thinking about ‘Design Thinking’. http://www.fastcompany.com/ blog/fred-collopy/manage-designing/ thinkingabout-design-thinking

Collopy, F. (2009, Mar13) Just What is Design Thinking? – The View from the Blogosphere. http://www.fastcompany.com/ blog/fred-collopy/manage-designing/just what-design-thinking-view-blogosphere

Dziersk, M. (2009, Mar15) Design Matters; Using Design Thinking to gain competitive leverage. http://www.fastcompany.com/ blog/mark-dziersk/design-finds-you/ designmatter-using-design-thinking-gaincompetitive-leverage

Dziersk, M. (2009, May22) Ten Things to Demand From Design Thinkers. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/markdziersk/design-finds-you/tenthingsdemand-design-thinkers

Patnaik, D. (2009, Aug25) Forget Design Thinking and Try Hybrid Thinking. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/dev-patnaik/ innovation/forget-designthinking-and-tryhybrid-thinking

Patnaik, D. (2009, Nov10) Reinventing the MBA: 4 Reasons to Mix Business With Design Thinking. http://www.fastcom pany.com/blog/dev-patnaik/innovation/ reinventing-mba

Robischon, N. (2009, Sep28) Living Climate Change: Design Thinking to Solve the World’s Biggest Problem. http://www. fastcompany.com/blog/noah-robischon/ editors-desk/ideointroduces-livingclimate-change

Tischler, L. (2009, Nov4) What’s Thwarting American Innovation? Too Much Science, Says Roger Martin. http://www.fastcom pany.com/blog/linda-tischler/designtimes/whats-thwartingamerican-innova tion-too-much-science-says-roger-mar

Tischler, L. (2009, Sep23) Want to Improve Democracy? Try Design Thinking. http:// www.fastcompany.com/blog/lindatischler/design-times/can-designthinkingimprove-democracy

Note: Shaded references are used in the article text.
