> 来源：Nineteenth-Century Design (Edgar Kaufmann, Jr)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Nineteenth-Century Design (Edgar Kaufmann, Jr)\Nineteenth-Century Design (Edgar Kaufmann, Jr).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Historicism and science

A return to past forms is regular in civilizations; unique, however, were the range, enthusiasm, and thoroughness of the nineteenth-century designers' exploitation of history. The scientific method was being widely applied to the evidence of explorers, archivists, and archaeologists; knowledge of every kind flooded in faster almost than understanding could deal with it. Much derogatorily called eclecticism was an earnest attempt to make use of this pate of information. Designers were convinced that in the mass of documentation lay a key to the principles of their art. Like scientists they compared, experimented, deduced. Systematic analysis of natural forms and colors, it was believed, might provide another approach to fundamentals. This recurrent search for design principles in nature or in history demonstrates that nineteenth-century designers were keenly aware of the need for a firm basis from which to deal with vast problems presented by the Industrial Revolution. For designers, the Industrial Revolution meant unprecedented floods of goods, unprecedented popular markets, and division of the once close-knit activities of designers, workers, manufacturers, and distributors. The traditional significance of handwork and the individual craftsman vanished. Steam power, in Europe alone, increased a hundred fold between 1800 and 1900; after 1870 gasoline engines and electricity began to augment energy at a rate previously inconceivable. Transportation improved so that, in effect, distances were reduced to one-eighth their former spans. The relationship of raw materials, fuels, and labor supply was upset; production centers moved; transmittal of stylistic and technological information was greatly speeded. Lithography and, later, color lithography profoundly influenced visual information; softer, fuller, more sensuous images became the rule. Mass production made its first strides in textiles, revolutionized again when synthetic dyes were perfected after 1850. Later wall papers became common, further changing the character of interiors. Synthetic materials began about 1840 with the vulcanization of rubber; gutta-percha, celluloid, papiermâché, artificial stone were quickly and widely accepted. Plywood (used by ancient Egyptians) was produced around mid-century; bent, solid wood furniture, first mass-produced around 1850 by Michael Thonet, 1796-1871, soon became a commonplace. In metals, mechanized stamping and spinning, improvements in casting, and above all electroplating made great changes; improved alloys appeared, and new metals like chromium and aluminum. No previous period had such a record of continuous change and invention.
