> 来源：The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 13. The Middle Ages in Europe

Amherst, A., A History of Gardening in England, London, 1896.

Coulton, G. G., Medieval Panorama, Cambridge, 1938.

Crisp, F., Mediaeval Gardens (2 vols.), London, 1924.

Hamilton, G.H., The Art and Architecture of Russia, Harmondsworth, 1954.

Henry, F., Irish Art in the early Christian Period to A.D. 800, revised edition of 1965; Irish Art during the Viking Invasions A.D. 800-1020, 1967; London.

Ivanov, V.N., Rostov Velikii and Uglich, Moscow, 1964.

Krautheimer, R., Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture, Harmondsworth, 1965.

Mumford, L., The City in History, London, 1961.

Parkinson, J., Paradisi in Sole Paradisus Terrestris, London, 1629.

## 14, 15. Italy: Renaissance, Mannerism and Baroque

Alberti, L.B., Ten Books on Architecture, trans. Leoni, London, 1955.

Berenson, B., Italian Pamters of the Renaissance, London, 1930.

Burckhardt, J., The Renaissance in Italy, 6th edition, London and New York, 1909.

Gromort, G., Jardns d' Italie, Paris, 1931.

Masson, G., Italian Gardens; Italian Villas and Palaces; London, 1961, 1959.

Percier and Fontaine, Choix des plus célebres Maisons de Plaisance de Rome, Paris, 1809.

Richter, J. P., Ihe Literary Works of Leonardo da Vinci (2 vols.), 2nd edition, London, 1939.

Scott, G., The Architecture of Humanism, London, 1914

Shepherd, J.C., and Jellicoc, G. A., Italian Gardens of the Renaissance, London, 1925.

Symonds, J. A., The Renaissance in Italy, London, 187586.

Vasari, G., Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects, I550.

Wittkower, R., Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism, London, 1949.

Wölfflin, H., The Art of the Italian Renaissance, New York, 1903.
