> 来源：The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 16. France: sixteenth and

seventeenth centuries

Androuet du Cerceau, J., Les plus excellents batiments de France, Paris, 1576.

d'Argenville, A.J. Dézallier, Theory and Practice of Gardening, trans. James, J., London, 1712.

Blomfield, R., A History of French Architecture (2 vols.), London, 1921.

Blunt, A., Art and Architecture in France, 15001700, Harmondsworth, 1953.

Boyceau, J., Traité du Jardinage selons les Raisons de la Nature et de P'Art, Paris, 1638.

Rigaud, Jean, Recueil choisi des plus belles Vues de palais, Chateaux, maisons . . . de Paris, et de ses environs, Paris, 1752.

Ward, W.H., The Architecture of the Renaissance in France (2 vols.), London, 1911.

17. Spain, Germany, England,

the Netherlands: sixteenth

and seventeenth centuries

Caus, Salomon de, Hortus Palatinus, Frankfurt, 1620.

Evelyn, John, Diaries, ed. Bray, W., London, 1818.

Hadfield, M., Gardening in Britain, London, 1960.

Kip and Knyff, Nouveau Théâtre de la Grande Bretagne, London, 1708; and numerous prints of English gardens.

Motley, J. L., The Rise of the Dutch Republic, London, 1855.

Rosenberg, J., Slive, S., and ter Kuile, E. H., Dutch Art and Architecture,1600-1800, Harmondsworth, 1966.

Villers Stuart, (. M. Spanih Gardens, London, 1929.

Wootton, Henry, Reliquiae Woottonianae, 1651.
