> 来源：The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.)\The landscape of man shaping the environment from prehistory to the present day (Jellicoe, Geoffrey Alan, 1900-, Jellicoe etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 20. Eighteenth Century: The English School

Clark, H. F., The English Landscape Garden, London, 1948.

Hussey, C., The Picturesque, new impression, London, 1967; English Gardens and Landscapes, 17001750, London, 1967.

Jourdain, M., The Works of William Kent, London, 1948.

Knight, R, Payne, The Landscape, a didactic Poem, London, 1794.

Malins, E., English Landscaping and Literature, 16601840, London, 1966.

Mason, G., Essay on Design in Gardening, London, 1768.

Pevsner, N., Studies in Art, Architecture and Design, Vol. I, London, 1968.

Pope, A., Essay on Criticism, London, 1711; Epistle to the Earl of Burlington, London, 1731

Price, U., Essays on the Picturesque as compared with the Sublime and the Beautiful, London, 1794.

Stroud, D., Capability Brown, London, 1950; Humphry Repton, London, 1962.

Switzer, S., The Nobleman, Gentleman and Gardener's Recreation, London, 1715.

Walpole, H., 'On Modern Gardening', Anecdotes of Painting, London, 1786.

Woodbridge, K., Landscape and Antiquity : aspects of English culture at Stourhead, 17181838, Oxford, 1970.
