> 来源：The economic history of India _ 1857-1947 -- Tirthankar Roy -- New Delhi, New York, India, 2000 -- IRL Press at Oxford University Press -- isbn13 9780195651546 -- 1dcc1a7a5317bc0fd8a747bbd332eee
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The economic history of India _ 1857-1947 -- Tirthankar Roy -- New Delhi, New York, India, 2000 -- IRL Press at Oxford University Press -- isbn13 9780195651546 -- 1dcc1a7a5317bc0fd8a747bbd332eee.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Macroeconomy

T'his chapter will be concerned with movements in macroeco-L nomic variables such as national income, savings, investment, price indices, etc. It will also explore the relationships between these variables, which can be seen as a way to describe the economy. Such descriptions can lead to better understanding of the causes behind growth and fluctuations. In that sense, the chapter is an application of basic macroeconomics. Further, they can be seen as a critique of colonialism. For colonial India, applied macroeconomics is a topic with political implications. These implications derive from two characteristics of colonial Indian economy. The first is the relatively low growth rate of national income. And the second is certain features of the miacroeconomy that arose from India's status as a British colony. Nationalist writers drew a cause and effect relationship between the political status of the country and its economic performance. Historians too have had to deal with the question, does colonialism explain India's stagnation? The subject, however, is not a very popular one. Partly due to problems of data, and partly because the analytical language is not widely used, it has been confined to a rather small body of scholars.

The chapter is divided into five sections. The first presents a summary of the main facts about the economy of colonial India. What were the specific features of the colonial economy? How were these responsible for growth or stagnation? These two questions will be answered briefly in the first section, abstracting from a number of details that will follow in the rest of the chapter. The second section presents a statistical overview of the 'real' side of the economy. It deals with incomes, investment, balance of payments, and government transactions. The third describes the 'financial' aspect, analysing two interrelated processes of money supply change, and the determination of exchange rate. The fourth deals with fluctuations in prices and outputs. In the fifth and final section, two possible answers of the question—why India stagnated—will be suggested. At the end of the book, there is an appendix showing how a national accounting framework can be useful in analysing the economic performance of colonial India. The national accounts being no more than a set of definitions, can be described very simply without any prior knowledge of macroeconomics. Nevertheless, for an adequate understanding of this system, familiarity with the first chapter of a standard macroeconomics textbook is required.

## An Overview: Economic Structure, Growth and Fluctuations

## Structure

The economy of colonial India had certain distinct features, some of which characterized the world economy in the nineteenth century. For example, a greater degree of openness in respect of trade or investment, and closer link between money supply and balance of payments. Some others can be called typically 'colonial'. An example is the presence of large remittance abroad on the government account. And still others were specific to India. For example, the importance of agriculture in the national economy, risks and uncertainty of monsoon agriculture, and the Indians' craving for gold and silver.

## Openness

India was a more open economy in the colonial period, relative to what it had been in the eighteenth century, and what it became in the first 40 years of independence. Openness can be seen in trade relations, income and capital flows, government transactions and policy, and the monetary system. Total foreign trade (export plus import) expressed as a ratio of national income tends to be used as a measure of the commercial openness of an economy. This ratio increased from possibly less than 10 per cent in the 1860s to about 20 per cent by 1914. These percentages are comparable with that of rapidly growing economies. The ratio for Japan was over 30 per cent about 1914. In the United States, the ratio was 16 in 1880, but fell thereafter as the country attained industrial maturity.

Apart from trade, income and capital flows were also almost certainly larger in the colonial period than before or after. Until the Great Depression, there were two main sources of net receipt in India's foreign transactions—foreign trade and foreign investment. India's exports exceeded the value of imports. India received foreign investment in industry, commerce, and infrastructure. These two net receipts were balanced by three large items of net payment: purchase of gold and silver, remittances made by the private sector, and remittances made by the government.

Government transactions were intimately connected with the balance of payments. The government borrowed heavily abroad to finance its investment and other commitments in India. Repayment of these loans along with regular remittance on account of charges made by Britain on Indian administration was a large net payment item in India's foreign transactions.

Money supply in colonial India was mainly influenced by the balance of payments. This feature characterized many contemporary economies. It arose from the primary objective of monetary policy in that period to stabilize the exchange rate. The objectives changed to stabilization of prices and outputs after the Second World War under the influence of Keynesian macroeconomic thought.

While the economy was 'globalized' in so many ways, it was also very dependent on a purely internal source of growth and fluctuations—agriculture.

## Agriculture as the Main Source of Domestic Demand

India was primarily an agrarian economy at the beginning and the end of the colonial rule. The main source of variability in national income was a purely internal one, the size of the harvest. The size of the harvest responded relatively less to demand and more to the quantity and timing of rainfall during the monsoons. In that sense, it was a variable more or less independent from the restof the economy. Agriculture, or rather the interaction between agriculture and the rest of the economy, is the key to explaining growth and fluctuations in colonial India.

## Policy

Formally, there was minimum direct government intervention in the economy. Stabilization of prices and outputs was meant to happen automatically. Economic growth was not seen as a goal that could be served by macroeconomic policy. Indirectly, of course, the actions and priorities of the government could be an important factor behind growt.Stabiization in Britai externalaccount wasusually ine minds of those who decided Indian affairs. When Indian interests and Britain's interests came in conflict, there was often an implicit or o

## Growth

Economic growth can be defined as sustained increase in total and per capita income for a sufficiently long period. Broader definitions would include various kinds of assets and the quality of life. Historically, economic growth begins to occur in the presence of sustained increase in demand for goods and services, and (a) availability of resources needed for expansion of supply of goods and services, (b) investment that enables expansion of productive capacity, and (c) increasing efficiency in the utilization of resources. The relative importance of these factors can vary.

Nearly all examples of rapid economic growth saw commercialization, and rapid growth in exports. Commercialization makes production market-oriented, and following Adam Smith, creates conditions for increased efficiency.

Empirical works on economic growth in the long run suggest a sequence whereby a poor country abundant in natural resources and labour starts by exporting resources. Later, with the exhaustion of resources, and increased savings and knowledge of alternative opportunities, it switches to export of labour-intensive manufactures. Further on, with exhaustion of surplus labour and further increases in savings and knowledge, it switches to capital-intensive industry. All three stages can generate growth in total income. But only the third—when capital-per-worker begins to increase and labour-productivity rises—implies growth in wages and in per capita incomes. The shift from the second to the third stage, therefore, is significant. That shift also requires limited or falling population growth rates so that surplus labour gets exhausted quickly. Further, the increased use of machinery or of capital-per-worker implies rising saving and investment rates in national income.

The pattern of growth in colonial India illustrates the first and the second stages of this model, though not the exact sequence of stages. In the nineteenth century, economic growth did occur. It was driven by India's integration in a rapidly growing world market mainly as supplier of goods intensive in natural resources or labour. Investment in irrigation and railways enabled the expansion in supply of land in a number of ways. Labour was not scarce. But as population was not growing rapidly, demand for labour probably grew faster than the supply of labour. On small-scale industry, commercialization had a contradictory effect, but on the average, small-scale industry eperienced growth rather than decline.

In the first half of the twentieth century, agriculture and investments slowed down. The growth momentum in industry and certain services strengthened. But agriculture had a much larger weight in national income. Why did the nineteenth century dynamics of the economy weaken? First, resource-intensive growth had reached its limits with the exhaustion of the critical resource, land. Second, the world economy entered a depression from the mid-1920s. And third, due to accelerated population growth, the supply of labour was rapidly increasing relative to capital and resources. Economic growth needed investment for making better use of scarce resources such as land, and in such sectors as education and health that could create the pre-conditions for lower population growth and develop human capital by enhancing the capability of the average worker.

Rates of investment were always low in colonial India. Further, the share of investment in government expenditure, and the ratio of public investment in national income both declined in the last 50 years of British rule. Why were these rates low and decreasing? One available answer is that, colonialism imposed financial burdens on the government. Alternatively, we can explain low rates of private investment through adverse structural features, such as high risks and uncertainty.

TABLE 7.1  
Measures of Economic Growth, 1891-1938
<table><tr><td>1891 1921 1938</td></tr><tr><td>(Base)</td></tr><tr><td>Real National Income Total</td></tr><tr><td>70 100 126 Per capita 78 100 82</td></tr><tr><td>Agriculture 67 100 100</td></tr><tr><td>Industry 100 175 </td></tr><tr><td>Infrastructure</td></tr><tr><td>Acreage irrigated 52 100 123</td></tr><tr><td>Railway mileage per capita</td></tr><tr><td>51 100 110</td></tr><tr><td>Postal articles handled per capita 27 100 57 Real value of telegraphs sent per capita 55 100 83</td></tr></table>

<table><tr><td></td><td>1891</td><td>1921 (Base)</td><td>1938</td></tr><tr><td>Employment</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Factory</td><td>25</td><td>100</td><td>137</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>80-85</td><td>100</td><td>105110</td></tr><tr><td>Foreign Trade</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Real value of export</td><td>76</td><td>100</td><td>96</td></tr><tr><td>Real value of import</td><td>72</td><td>100</td><td>95</td></tr><tr><td>Financial Development</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Real value of bank deposits</td><td>29</td><td>100</td><td>183</td></tr><tr><td>Resources</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cultivated land (million acres)</td><td>56</td><td>100</td><td>103</td></tr><tr><td>Production of coal (million tonnes)</td><td>11</td><td>100</td><td>156</td></tr><tr><td>Population</td><td>89</td><td>100</td><td>153</td></tr></table>

T eh.

Thus, colonial India illustrates the strengths and limitations of economic growth based on intensive use of natural resources and labour. The initial impetus and its weakening are both outlined in Table 7.1 with the help of a number of indices. It shows that agriculture and the physical infrastructure progressed in the nineteenth century but the rate of growth fell in the interwar period. There was no exact cut-off date, but 1921 demonstrates this slowdown well enough. The only sectors where growth continued in the interwar period were industry and financial services.

## Fluctuations

The location of India in the tropics makes it exceedingly droughtprone. The prospect of devastating famines once every few years was inherent in India's ecology. Hence, not only did high risk discourage investment by making the returns uncertain, but also, available saving were often used up in coping with calamities. A major form of savings in India was gold and silver jewellery. This preference for precious metals reduced savings available for productive investment. This behaviour can be interpreted as a response to risks. Other financial assets fluctuate in real value given the price fluctuations that climatic factors cause. Gold and silver might be seen as more stable assets.

Prices (and real wages) in colonial India fluctuated a great deal. India functioned under currency regimes that made money supply sensitive to the balance of payments. But real incomes depended primarily on harvests. Harvests were extremely weather-sensitive, and the weather was unreliable. This points to an inherent and chronic maladjustment between money supply and the transactions demand for money. Episodes of very rapid inflation were usually periods when a bad harvest coincided with buoyant trade demand, so that a decline in demand for money coincided with an increased supply of money. Similarly, the Great Depression saw contraction in money supply because of trade depression, even as domestic demand for money did not decline.

India was not exceptional in this instability. Even in the 1930s, most colonial economies in Asia and Africa possessed neither central banks, nor governments explicitly concerned with domestic stabilization. Many colonies were agrarian economies constantly under the threat of harvest-induced fluctuations. The interwar period witnessed price and income fluctuations more severe than the world had seen before. In a world well integrated by trade and investment, these shocks quickly transmitted to regions ill-equipped to cope with them. It is probable that an unstable environment inhibited local enterprise.

## Statistical Outline

Although some estimates of India's national income before 1900 are available, reasonably reliable estimates begin from 1900. For the nineteenth century, only the foreign trade figures are reliable and fairly complete. This section, therefore, will deal mainly with data for the period 190047. Wherever possible, it will cite nineteenth century estimates and compare them with the twentieth. In most cases, the period 1900-14 is more or less similar to the latter half of the nineteenth century. But between the pre-war and the interwar periods, there were major differences. The First World War, in other words, was a macroeconomic 'structural break'.

It is not necessary to go into the details of how the various national income estimates are arrived at or how many different estimates there are. It is sufficient here to mention that alternative fgures arise mainly from alternative estimates of agricultural production, a subject that has been dealt with in Chapter 3. The latest figures come from an article published in 1997 by a major contributor in this field, .Sivasubramonian. This article will be the main source of national income figures used in this chapter. However, the student of the subject ought to be aware of the assumptions that are usually made in any calculation of India's national income in this period. The readi  hen the apr will   the or that estimation procedures.

## National Income

What we usually have as India's national income is the expression Gross Domestic Product or GDP + net factor income from abroad + taxes, that is, national income inclusive of taxes. This is the variable we shall be dealing with in this section. Tables 7.2 and 7.3 summarize the basic statistics of national income. From Table 7.2, two conclusions can be drawn. First, in 190047 national income grew. Second, it grew at a rate less than 1 per cent per annum. By the best estimates available, nineteenth century did see higher growth rates. In the twentieth century, the 1 per cent growth in National Income translated into a growth rate of per capita income (0.1 per cent) that was near zero. The rate was not only too slow to ensure rapid improvements in living standards but also to be comparable to growth rates of post-independence India, or selective international rates.

At 0.1 per cent per year, it would have taken India centuries to double the average standard of living. Post-independence India has seen higher rates as Table 7.2 shows. The post-1950 period is perhaps not a fair comparison. Productive capacity has grown worldwide so enormously in the last 4050 years that the world today is used to much higher growth rates than in the past. However, even the past standards of the rest of the world were higher. In the peak periods of the Industrial Revolution, Britain's real national product grew at well over 2 per cent and average income at over 1 per cent. A rate such as the latter was common to most parts of the industrializing world in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. These countries began from income levels that were higher than India's in the mid nineteenth century. Japan is often compared with India because their standards of living were similar in the mid-nineteenth century. From that time until the beginning of the Second World War, Japan's average income grew at a rate that was 510 times that of India. Such massive disparities in rates of growth derived partly from India's slower growth of total income, but it also reflected the fact that population was growing at rates that were dissimilar. India's population was beginning to accelerate in the twentieth century, at a time when population growth rate was beginning to fall in most of these countries or stabilize at about 1 per cent per year. In Japan, population growth rate was higher and accelerated, but it fell quickly within 1520 years after the war.

TABLE 7.2  
National Income at 19489 Prices, 1900-5 to 19925
<table><tr><td colspan="3">(annual averages)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">National income</td><td>Exponential growth rates over the period (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Total (Rs billions)</td><td>Per capita (Rs)</td><td>Total Per capita</td></tr><tr><td>1900-5</td><td>228</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19427</td><td>43.4 51.5 239</td><td>0.9 0.1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>2.0* 4.0*</td></tr><tr><td>19925</td><td>—</td><td></td></tr></table>

\* Growth rate over 195051 and 19925  
Source: S. Sivasubramonian, 'Revised Estimates of the National Income of India, 1900— 1 to 19467', IESHR, 34(2), 1997; Statistical Abstracts for India, New Delhi, various years.

The Composition of National Income by Sector of Origin Table 7.3 shows that growth rates of real income were unequal across sectors. India was primarily an agrarian economy throughout colonial rule. Agriculture was growing slowly in the early twentieth century. Industry and the services grew at much higher rates. A great deal of the explanation of India's slow overall growth turns on the question why agriculture was growing slowly. The issue has been discussed in Chapter 3. One immediate reason is the low levels of investment in the economy, to which we shall return.

TABLE 7.3  
National Income by Sector, 1900-90s
<table><tr><td colspan="3">Percentage contribution to national income at current prices</td><td colspan="2">Exponential grorwth rates over the period, constant prices (%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Primary Secondary Tertiary</td><td>Net income from abroad</td><td></td><td>Primary Secondary Tertiary</td></tr><tr><td>1900-4</td><td>66.0 12.0</td><td>23.5</td><td>-1.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1942-6 19925°</td><td>53.3 14.5 34.5 24.0</td><td>32.3 -0.2 41.5</td><td>0.4</td><td>1.4 1.7</td></tr></table>

\* Net Domestic Product Source: See Table 7.2.

It is necessary discuss the eperienc the econdary nd the tertiary sectors in a little more detail. There are three main components withinthe secondary sector—mining, large-scale industry and small-scale industry. Large-scale industry grew at rates over 4 per cent per year. The much arger small-scale industry grew at les than 1 per cent. Within the tertiary sector, the contribution of government administration grew at over 2 per cent per year. The two other major components—commerce and transport, and real estate—also expanded quite rapidly at rates of about 1.5 per cent. Thus, there were three powerful positive forces driving the non-agricultural sector. These were, industrialization, government administration, and longdistance trade. The most important negative force here was the slow growth of real income in the small-scale industry. As Chapter 4 argued, the overall small growth rate can be misleading as it conceals the fact that small-scale industry had both growing and declining segments in it.

It needs to be noted that net income from abroad was steadily negative. This component consisted of payment of interest, dividend, pensions, salaries, etc. to foreigners. There were a large number of foreigners working in India who received part of this income for services without which a modern economy would not function in India. However, whether all of this payment was justified or not is a debatable question, to which we shall return.

## Composition of National Income: Types of Goods and Services

National income can be seen as an aggregate of consumption goods, capital goods, net export, and goods and services purchased by the government sector (see Table 7.4). For a long-term comparison, similar sets of figures for two periods after independence are also shown in the table. Here, there are three interesting lessons to be learnt about how economic structures of colonial and independent India differed. First, colonial India was a more open economy and a significant net exporter compared to India in the 1970s. The contrast reduced after the mid-1980s with the economic reforms that again encouraged exports. Second, in respect of private investment and government expenditure, colonial India was more backward than independent India. Finally, colonial India was characterized by very high proportion of consumption in national income. This has been decreasing over the decades. All poor countries share this feature.

TABLE 7.4  
Components of National Income, 1900-90s
<table><tr><td></td><td>1901-13</td><td>1930-9</td><td>1940-6</td><td>1970-5</td><td>19906</td></tr><tr><td>National income</td><td>100.0</td><td>100.0</td><td>100.0</td><td>100.0</td><td>100.0</td></tr><tr><td>Net export of goods and servicesa</td><td>3.4</td><td>1.4</td><td>n.a.</td><td>-0.7</td><td>-0.7</td></tr><tr><td>Investment</td><td>6.9</td><td>9.3</td><td>7.3</td><td>18.3</td><td>24.6</td></tr><tr><td>Purchases by the governmentb</td><td>5.4</td><td>3.5</td><td>4.3</td><td>8.9</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td>Consumption</td><td>84.3</td><td>85.7</td><td>n.a.</td><td>76.0</td><td>59.5</td></tr></table>

a The percentages for the colonial period use Sivasubramonian's revised national income estimates.  
b For the colonial period, current revenue is taken as a proxy for expenditures in rupees, that is expenditures on goods and services produced in India.  
For the colonial period, calculated as a residual.  
Sources: The other tables in this chapter for the colonial period, and Economic and Political Weekly Research Foundation, National Accounts Statistics of India 19501 to 19967, Mumbai, October 1998 for the more recent periods.

## Foreign Trade

A key to understanding the tertiary sector growth is the trend in India's foreign trade. Foreign trade as a ratio of national income increased significantly from the late nineteenth century. The ratio of exports to national income is a rough measure of the importance of foreign trade for the economy. This was about 8-9 per cent over 190039, with a drop around the time of the Great Depression.' Total foreign trade (export plus import) expressed as a ratio of national income tends to be used as a measure of the commercial openness of an economy. This ratio increased from possibly less than 10 per cent in the 1860s to about 20 per cent about 1914. These percentages are comparable with that of rapidly growing economies (see 'openness' above). The growth of the tertiary sector reflected India's increasing openness. The fact that net export (export minus import) was steadily positive in colonial India has some significance in causal analysis of her economic growth or stagnation, as we shall see.

Both the composition and direction of India's trade underwent considerable change in the colonial period with the First World War as a watershed. As Table 7.5 shows, if the major items of export are classified into three broad groups—purely agricultural or peasant exports, semi-processed natural resources, and manufactured goods then the prewar period mainly saw a great burst of peasant exports. But i the interwar per idustr cpabiliy rovn number of ways and so did manufactured exports. The same tendency also altered the composition of imports in favour of machinery and intermediate goods. Limited tariff protection had been at work from the mid-1920s in the case of some industries. Import-substitution speeded up in these industries in the interwar period. The most important example was cotton textiles.

In the context of trade, India's dependence on the Chinese market declined sharply in the pre-war period (see Table 7.6). India's dependence on Britain as a market also declined in the pre-war period, but increased somewhat in the interwar period mainly due to preferential tariffs under the Imperial Preference Treaty (1921). India's dependence on Britain as a source of imports was almost total in the mid-nineteenth century, and changed relatively little until the First World War. In the interwar period, there was a sharp drop in Britain's share, and increase in those of Japan, USA, Germany, and Italy. The interwar period, in short, was one of diversification both in India's capability and in its trade partners.

TABLE 7.5  
Composition of Trade, 1850-1935  
(percentages of total export or total import)
<table><tr><td></td><td>1850-1</td><td>1910-1</td><td>1935-6</td></tr><tr><td>Export</td><td>26.2</td><td>55.0</td><td>29.5</td></tr><tr><td>Agricultural (raw cotton, raw jute, foodgrains, seeds) Semi-processed goods (indigo, opium,</td><td>42.8</td><td>12.5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>hides and skins)</td><td></td><td></td><td>neg.</td></tr><tr><td>Manufactured goods (tea, jute, cotton textiles)</td><td>4.8</td><td>19.3</td><td>28.1</td></tr><tr><td>Import</td><td></td><td>33.5</td><td>15.3</td></tr><tr><td>Cotton textiles</td><td>40.5</td><td>3.7</td><td>11.1</td></tr><tr><td>Machinery</td><td>neg.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Intermediate goods (mineral oil, metals)</td><td>16.8</td><td>13.8</td><td>13.3</td></tr></table>

Note: neg. stands for negligible  
Source: K.N. Chaudhuri, 'Foreign Trade and Balance of Payments' in CEHI 2.

The change in direction of trade reflected a bigger shift in regional trade pattern and industrialization. A recent scholarship has argued that in the early twentieth century, intra-Asian trade expanded while Europe's dominance in Asian trade reduced. The intra-Asian trade was based on the emergence of the modern cotton textile industry in Japan. A three-way cotton-oriented trade and division of labour between India, China and Japan emerged as a result. In turn, intra-Asian trade stimulated primary good exports from China and Southeast Asia.²

TABLE 7.6  
Direction of Foreign Trade, 1850—1940
<table><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=2>(percentages of total export or import)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1850-1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>1910-1      1940-1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=5 colspan=1>Export from India toBritain                                 44.6China                                  35.0Japan                                 neg.USA                                  neg.Import to India fromBritain                                 72.1</td><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>24.9          34.7</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>9.2           5.3</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6.4           4.8</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>6.4          13.9</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1>62.2          22.9</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=2 colspan=2>China                                   8.6Japan                                 neg.USA                                   neg.        2.6          17.2</td></tr><tr><td rowspan=1 colspan=1></td></tr></table>

Note: neg. stands for negligible.  
Source: See Table 7.5.

## Saving and Investment

Sustained economic growth requires a sufficiently high proportion of investment in national income. Investments are financed partly from domestic savings in bank deposits and securities, and partly from foreign investment inflow. Deposits and securities, however, were not the popular form of assets in which Indians saved. A substantial part of savings consisted of hoarded-up precious metals. In addition, a smaller part of the savings went as investments abroad, and as purchases of government bonds in India.

What is a sufficiently high rate of savings and investment may be debatable. But there cannot be any debate over the fact that these rates in colonial India were very low indeed. Net capital formation and savings was 2—4 per cent of national income in the first half of the twentieth century (Table 7.7). In the same period, the ratio increased dramatically from about 8 to 18 per cent of national income in Japan. In some industrialized countries such as the United States it declined. But it declined to a level that was many times that of India's ratio. Table 7.7 also reveals some other adverse features of capital accumulation in India. These are the rather low proportion of investment in machinery, the small percentage of investment in agriculture, and the declining share of the government in aggregate investment. A curious feature is the rather high proportion of depreciation or replacement expenditure (note the difference between gross and net capital formation).

Private foreign investment was a rather small fraction of the total foreign investment or total capital formation. It went through three distinct phases. In the late nineteenth century, it was mainly confined to railway construction. By the 1880s and the 1890s, industrial investment dominated and railway investment had slowed down. The major sectors where money flowed were tea, jute, and mining. A great deal of this money was in the form of portfolio investment. That is, it was in the form of shares floated and held in Britain by individual investors. This pattern began to change in the interwar period. Portfolio investment tended to be replaced by direct investment in subsidiaries of foreign firms. The Anglo—Indian firms tended to be replaced by multinational firms. And the old products tended to be replaced by new and relatively technology-intensive ones. In one view, the waning ability or willingness of the Anglo-Indian firms in doing business in India reflected the promise of a change in the political environment. In another view, it was influenced by tariff protection and the attraction of a protected home market.

Table 7.8 presents data on savings. The point to note in this table is the proportion of national income that went to the purchase of gold and silver. In the early part of the twentieth century the proportion was about as large as that of other forms of saving. In the normal course, and in any good agricultural year, Indians purchased gold and silver in large quantities. Among the few exceptions in colonial period to this normal behaviour were, the years of the Great Depression and the two World Wars. During the wars, gold import was restricted legally. Just after the depression there was net export. The difference between metals and other forms of saving is the following.

All other forms of saving were essentially lending by savers to potential investors, but those who bought precious metal hoarded it. Except to a limited extent when metals were mortgaged against loans, they did not generate new investment. Thus, precious metals were a form of 'leakage' from funds available for productive investment.

TABLE 7.7  
Estimates of Investment, 1901 to 1946
<table><tr><td>1901-13 1930-9 1940-6</td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of gross capital formationa</td></tr><tr><td>100.0 100.0 100.0</td></tr><tr><td>Gross capital formation Construction 61.2 67.5 70.2</td></tr><tr><td>29.8 29.2 28.5</td></tr><tr><td>Machinery 2.0 3.5 4.6b</td></tr><tr><td>Agriculture</td></tr><tr><td>Other 27.8 25.7 23.9</td></tr><tr><td>Inventory 9.0 3.3 1.4</td></tr><tr><td>Public sector 32.7 22.2 18.0 Private Sector 67.3 71.8 82.0</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of national incomed</td></tr><tr><td>Gross capital formation 6.93 9.35 7.30</td></tr><tr><td>Net capital formation® 4.00 2.84 2.12 Public investment 2.23 2.08 1.32</td></tr></table>

This is defined as domestic investment plus foreign investment inflow. In fact, the 190113 figures relate to 'total' capital formation, whereas 19406 ones relate to 'dol a How y pl a trickle.  
b Rural' in the source.  
Net capital formation is gross minus depreciation.

TABLE 7.8  
Estimates of Saving, 190146
<table><tr><td></td><td>1896-1913</td><td>1930-9</td><td>1940-6</td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of national income</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Financial saving*</td><td>2-3</td><td>3.2n</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>Net accumulation of gold and silver</td><td>1.5</td><td>1.5</td><td>0.0</td></tr></table>

investment outflow, and purchase of government bonds in India. Source: Goldsmith, Financial Development, pp. 1 and 80.

## Public Finance

Government expenditure must be matched with government revenue otain  balanount. Thee werewo yp ov ernment expenditure in British India—expenditure in India and expenditure abroad. The two most important types of government's expenditure abroad were pensions paid in sterling to retired employees, and interest on public debt raised in London. The government could finance its expenditure by three means. The first was current revenues; 7080 per cent of current revenues was raised in taxes. The second was borrowings from abroad, and the third, borrowings at home. We can write:

Government expenditure = expenditure in India + expenditure abroad

= Government's receipts

= current revenue (mainly taxes) + borrowings brori in I India

The detailed composition of government revenues and expenditure will be discussed in Chapter 8. Table 7.9 in this chapter describes only the broad pattern of public finance in the first half of the twentieth century. A few points in this data are noteworthy. The government borrowed quite heavily to finance its expenditures, both in the London money market and also in India. These borrowings peaked at the time of the World Wars. There were two types of securities sold by the British government. One was denominated in sterling, and the other denominated in rupees. In the nineteenth century, the main buyers of both were Europeans. Some had associations with India and some did not. The holders of rupee securities were more likely to be Europeans residing in India. But over time, the proportion of Indian banks and Indians increased among the buyers of rupee securities. Also, over time, there was increasing reliance on the Indian money market by the government. The London borrowings as a proportion of national income peaked in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. These loans were raised to finance wars and railway construction in India. By 1900-13, military compulsions were much weaker, and railway investment was beginning to decline. After the Great Depression, net borrowings in London steadily declined, but the government's debt in the form of rupee securities increased.

An interesting feature reflected by Table 7.9 is the declining share of investment in government expenditure, and the declining ratio of public investment in national income. The three main heads of investment were, railways, irrigation, and roads and buildings. Of these three items the first was the largest. But its share in gross investment fell from 51 per cent in 18981913 to 27 in 19308. Irrigation was a small item of expenditure (1116 per cent in this period). The share of roads and buildings increased from 31 to 46 per cent. But there was a net decline in public investment-national income ratio.

The two most important items in remittance on the government account were, as we have mentioned, pensions and debt service.

TABLE 7.9  
Receipts and Payments on the Government Account, 1901 to 1946
<table><tr><td></td><td>1901-13</td><td>1930-9</td><td>1940-6</td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of national income Current revenue</td><td>5.39</td><td>3.50</td><td>4.26</td></tr><tr><td>Net capital receipts</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Net issue of rupee debt</td><td>0.22</td><td>0.49</td><td>3.48</td></tr><tr><td>Net issue of sterling debt</td><td>0.30</td><td>0.19</td><td>0.96</td></tr><tr><td>Expenditure*</td><td>5.91</td><td>3.80</td><td>6.78</td></tr><tr><td>Investment (from Table 7.7)</td><td>2.21</td><td>2.08</td><td>1.32</td></tr></table>

Calculated by summing items on the receipt side.  
il D b. . 2.31 (pp. 1125).

## Balance of Payments

Balance of payments is a statement of the external transactions of a country. Receits in foreign currency must equal payments in forin currency for a zero balance. There were four main heads of external ons Brii Ind w ort movement, (c) net export of gold, and (d) net factor receipts from abroad. Net capital movements consisted of net private investment from abroad and net borrowings by the government. Net factor receipt consisted of net factor receipts on the private account, and net factor receipts on the government account. Of course, some of these four items could be negative and others posiive such that when added up they totalled zero.

The basic pattern of balance of payments is shown in Table 7.10. The table covers the period for which detailed balance of payments estimates exist. However, the pattern for the 1920s is not very different from the pattern that existed in India before the First World War. Until the Great Depression, two items, net commodity export and net investment, usually attained positive values. The three other items, net export of gold and silver, net receipt of remittances by the private sector, and net receipt of remittances by the government, were usually negative.

TABLE 7.10  
Balance of Payments, 192139
<table><tr><td></td><td>1921-9</td><td>1930-9</td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of national income</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Net export of goods</td><td>3.0</td><td>2.0</td></tr><tr><td>Net export of treasure</td><td>-1.3</td><td>1.4</td></tr><tr><td>Net Private remittances into India</td><td>2.7</td><td>-3.3</td></tr><tr><td>Net government remittances into India</td><td>-0.4</td><td>-0.5</td></tr><tr><td>Net capital movements*</td><td>1.4</td><td>0.5</td></tr><tr><td>Balance of Payments</td><td>0.0</td><td>0.0</td></tr></table>

Defined as net foreign investment inflow plus purchase of government bonds by foreigners. In this table, this item is estimated as a residual balancing item. This item requires some explanation on database. In India's external transactions, the most reliable data is available for commodity and treasure. Discharge of public debt in sterling is also reasonably correct. Banerji has estimated, within some margin of error, the factor payments series. There is no reliable estimate available for net investment by the private sector, and therefore, no reliable estimate available for net capital movements. In this table, net capital movements are calculated by simply adding the other four items (all the five items together should add to zero). But this figure is subject to the same margin of error that applies to Banerji's series on factor payments.

Source: A.K. Banerji, India's Balance of Payments, Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 1962, Tables V, XXVI and XXXVII; and national income figures from S. Sivasubramonian (see Table 7.1).

This basic pattern in the balance of payments changed towards the end of colonial rule. First, net exports declined. Second, there was a steady decline in factor payments, both on private and government accounts. The major reasons behind the decline were, withdrawal of private foreign investment (which was an important part of the process historians call 'decolonization'), and retirement of sterling debts. In the 1930s, gold imports fell and gold exports increased. Many historians have seen in these gold exports a sign of distress of Indian peasants during the Great Depression (more on this later). Irrespective of whether this reading is correct or not, the gold exports did save Indian balance of payments in the 1930s. In this period, net commodity exports fell but India's obligations on factor payments remained high and negative. Without the gold exports India might have defaulted on those obligations. In general, the long-term colonial pattern of balance of payments represented in 19219 figures began to become weak and unstable after 1930 (see also Table 7.11).

TABLE 7.11  
Structure of Balance of Payments, Comparison of Early and Late Colonialism
<table><tr><td>(Rs millions, annual average)</td></tr><tr><td>1866-76 1930-9</td></tr><tr><td>Net export of goods 221 403</td></tr><tr><td>Net export of treasure -87 283</td></tr><tr><td>Net private remittances into Indiaa -66 -675</td></tr><tr><td>Net government remittances into India -130 -111</td></tr><tr><td>Net capital movementsb 61 100c</td></tr><tr><td>Balance of Payments 0 0</td></tr></table>

factor payments for 19309.  
y ehange overnt debt or867both privae forenvstmnt and government debt for 1930-9.  
Derived as a residual.  
Sources: A.K. Banerji, Aspects of Indo-British Economic Relations, 185898, Oxford Universiy Press, Bombay, 1,,a Bner, Ind Balance  Payments, Tables V, XXVI and XXXVII.

Factor payments need a detailed description. As Table 7.12 shows, there were some items that dominated net payments throughout the colonial period. The most important was remittance by the government in the form of the payment of pensions to retired government pl t   , and increasingly, debt-service. In the nineteenth century, another large item was dividend payments of companies that had constructed part of the railways in India. Payment on this account increased from 9 per cent of net payments in 18601 to 4050 per cent in the 1870s, the peak period of private railway construction. It dropped steadily thereafter. With the expansion of general private enterprise, remittance on private account such as interest and dividend payments by individuals or freight and insurance charges on imports increased over time. But the government account was always a major element in factor payments.

TABLE 7.12  
Composition of Factor Payments, 1860-1939
<table><tr><td></td><td>(percentage of total net payment)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1860-1 1921-2 1938-9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Main payment items:</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Freight, insurance, etc. on import Net railway dividend</td><td>n.a. 26</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Remittance by the government</td><td>9</td><td>0 0 28b</td></tr><tr><td>Interest and dividend on private investment</td><td>43a</td><td>31b 38</td></tr><tr><td>Total net payment for services and</td><td>18 100</td><td>37 100 100</td></tr></table>

Home charges' as defined by Banerji.  
Consists of interest on public debt and pension payments only.  
Source: Banerji, Aspects of Indo-British Economic Relations, Table 34 (pp. 168-9), and Banerji, cited under Table 7.10 above.

## Money Supply and Balance of Payments

Money supply in colonial India was mainly influenced by the balance of payments. This feature characterized many contemporary economies. It arose from the primary objective of monetary policy in that period to stabilize the exchange rate. The objectives changed to stabilization of prices and outputs after the Second World War under the influence of Keynesian macroeconomic thought. Another difference between earlier and later monetary regimes is that, in recent times domestic stabilization has been maintained with intervention from central banks. But in the past, exchange rate stabilization occurred without significant role of any central monetary authority.

Behind such a policy, there worked a theory of automatic stabilization. Presuming that money supply responds to balance of payments, if a country experiences excess demand for its goods and services, its money supply should increase to the extent of the excess demand. The resultant inflation in the country will reduce demand for its exports and restore balance. Exchange rate need not change. All that is required is a system wherein money supply is linked to balance of payments. Similarly, if a country experiences poor demand for its goods and services, there should occur a deflation leading to a rise in demand for its exports.

In the interwar period, the theory of automatic stabilization began to break down. Its most significant weakness was that a country operating in such a system must have enough reserves (under gold standard, reserves mainly in the form of gold or currencies convertible into gold) to pay for its obligations when demand for its goods fell. If it did not have enough reserves it might need to raise its interest rates to attract capital from abroad. Both due to deflation (rise in real interest rates) and due to rise in nominal interest rates, the result could be a collapse of domestic investment. In theory, foreign investment attracted by high interest rates can compensate for the decline in domestic investment. But in practice, if every country follows a policy of attracting foreign investment to its domain none may succeed. This was, broadly, the situation that the developed world faced on the eve of the Great Depression.

By this time, many developed countries had started their own central banks, even though the objectives of monetary policy did not change very much yet. In India, a central bank with some freedom in deciding the objectives of policy had to wait until almost the end of colonial rule.

## The Silver Standard

From 1858 to 1893 the Indian rupee was a silvercoin. Its supply cul increase by one of two means. First, when foreign buyers of Indian exports or more often the exchange banks that financed foreign trade wanted to pay for their purchases, they could go to the Secretary of State in London and buy a draft by paying in pound sterling. Against this draft, known as 'council draft, rupee was paid by the government in India. The sterling that the Secretary received in London served an essential function. It was used to pay for factor services on government account. The second route was, the banks could buy silver, ship them to India, and get the silver minted into rupees at any of the government mints for a fee. Anyone in India could also take silver to the mints and get them coined for a small fee. Which of these two routes the exchange banks would take depended on two prices: ()the price o silver n terms  sterlig, and) the rupesterling exange rate. I silver bae cheper while he change at mained unchanged, banks would find it cheaper to buy silver rather than council drafts. The rupee-sterling exchange rate was basically sabl But it tndoluctuwhaepnigonthemand and supply of India's tradeable.

From the 1870s this system came under stress because excess supp terms of sterling. Silver was abundantly available because most countries had departed from silver standard for their currency and moved towards a gold standard. If the Secretary of State were to sell any draft, he had to depreciate the rupee, that is, offer more rupee for sterling. There were two implications of this move. The first was a possible inflation in India as import prices increased. The second was pressure on the government budget as government remittances would then require more rupees per sterling. The government did depreciate the rupee, but as the fall in silver prices continued the government was forced to stop the practice of allowing anyone to mint silver coins in 1893, reserving that right for itself. This move stopped a channel by which anyone other than the government was able to get rupee on demand.

## The Gold Exchange Standard

From about 1898, there was only one price that mattered—the rupeesterling exchange. This was set at 1s-4d per rupee, the rate at which the Secretary of State sold drafts. The sterling itself was on a gold standard, that is, convertible against gold. The rupee was not convertible against gold but only against sterling. This system was known as the 'gold exchange standard'. In principle, money supply in India expanded when the Secretary of State sold council drafts, whether to finance export or new investment in India. Money supply contracted when the government converted its revenues into sterling and remitted them abroad. There was no immediate effect on money supply of net borrowings. The aim was to keep the exchange rate stable. In any market, if the price remains fixed the market must clear by quantity adjustments. That is, supply has to change every time demand changes. The government in India would occasionally release more rupees or withdraw more into reserves depending on its perception of how tight or easy the money market was in particular seasons.

In the period before the First World War, this system worked smoothly because there was always a surplus of export over import, and thus a steady supply of sterling relative to rupees. In 1906-7, the situation became adverse. A harvest failure led to a fall in export whereas imports continued to come in. Given that the demand for rupees fell, while the demand for sterling was strong, there were few takers for the council bills in London at the prevailing rate. If the government were to avoid the rupee depreciating, it needed to release as much sterling as traders and bankers wanted to pay for imports into India. This it did, reluctantly, by using resources of its currency reserves set up for such occasions. Also, 'reverse' council drafts were introduced, which were drafts sold in rupees but payable in sterling in London.

During the war, and especially in the interwar period, the monetary regime came under steady pressure from both economic and political fronts. The major threat to the system arose with inflation in silver towards the middle of the First World War. Given the exchange rate, such an event could cause rupees to disappear from the market on a large scale since the rupee was still largely a silver coin. Under the circumstances, a managed float of the exchange rate was introduced around 1917. There was immediate pressure to appreciate the rupee against sterling. But gradually, with the stability in silver prices and increasing usage of paper currency, the exchange rate became steadier. This switch in regime from fixed to a 'managed float' was not quite deliberate. It was more of an accident as the government took time to arrive at a rate that could be taken as the long-term equilibrium. In any case, the new regime did make currency growth fluctuations more regularized and manageable in terms of magnitude in the first half of the twenties. From 1926, exchange was again closel toll mbout  p up e  p for the next several decades.

The period 192535 was one of great financial disturbance worldwide. The Great Depression was in many ways the immediate cause o thee disturbances. But there were also long-term causes that involved the nature of international trade and payments in the interwar period. More on the Depression will follow later.

## Critique of Colonial Monetary Policy

There are two types of criticisms against the colonial Indian monetary regime. The first arose from contemporary Indian business and nationalist politicians and was related to the objective of holding the rupeesterling exchange rate fixed at what the officials thought was t vThea lh h to be systematically overvalued to implicitly subsidize government charges in sterling. Such a bias would have restricted export prospects, even though it might encourage the import of capital goods. The main evidence for inadequate supply of rupees was a steady decline in price level in the second half of the 1920s. Bureaucrats in charge of operating the system disputed the significance of this evidence.

A second criticism of the regime found expression in contemporary scholarly views on India, but took shape more explicitly in later research. India, like the rest of the interwar world, had a fixed or closely-controlled exchange regime. While the world retreated from fixed exchange rates during the Depression, in India, monetary policy remained more rigid. Moreover, the policy never compromised on India's external obligations on the government account—not even at the height of the Depression. This rigidity was decidedly 'colonial', and it contributed to the difficulty in depression adjustment in India.

Many historians believe that the basic aims of monetary policy in colonial India were connected not with India's welfare but with the stability of economic transactions between Britain and the rest of the British empire. In this sense, the monetary policy was 'colonial' These aims were not always explicitly stated by the government itself, but they were quite openly discussed by several of the officers in charge of monetary policy.

One overwhelming objective was to keep the rupee-sterling exchange rate stable especially to prevent the rupee from depreciating. This was done in the interests of stable trade between Britain and India, and to provide the government some stability in its calculation of the remittances to be paid. A second aim was to restrain India's import of gold. India played a counter-cyclical role in the world economy. This role was mediated by the Indian desire for gold. In a world characterized by fixed exchange rates and gold as a main item of reserves, expansion in India or the world, led to India absorbing non-monetary gold at the expense of monetary gold elsewhere. During and after the First World War, Britain was faced with trade and liquidity problems at home and the fear that Indian gold appetite might upset Britain's own post-war adjustment process. Under these fears, the British authorities tried to restrain expansionary tendencies in India. In short, both the objectives implied a bias against economic expansion in India.

Yet another drawback of colonial monetary policy was that it was particularly inadequate in the task of stabilization of prices and outputs. This aspect drew the attention of only a few scholars and commentators, but they included such eminent names as J.M. Keynes.

## Fluctuations in Prices and Outputs

## Price Movements

Agricultural output was an independent variable swayed by weather conditions. For this reason, prices were extremely volatile in colonial India. Severe inflations, of the order of 2030 per cent, were common. Usually these were followed quickly by an equally sharp crash. High volatility in prices can generate high volatility in profits and thus discourage investments. Why were prices so volatile? The fact that harvests were so dependent on weather is only a part of the problem. Partly, volatility derived from the interaction between monetary factors and harvest shocks.

India's monetary system kept a balance between demand for rupees from foreign trade and the supply of rupees. It did not leave any road open for traders and producers not involved with exports to get more rupees in hand if they needed to finance a purchase. In other words, this system was badly suited to serve demand for means of payment on behalf of purely internal commerce. Now, internal commerce was driven not only by foreign trade, but also by the size of the harvest. There was little flexibility in the monetary system to adjust to the needs of internal trade when the harvest was better or worse than average, the result was price fluctuation. A good harvest year needed more money to meet the increased transactions demand for money. But the foreign trade situation might lead to a deflation. A bad harvest year needed less money for transactions, but might see an expansion in money supply.

In a few episodes in the early twentieth century, such a conjunction of monetary and real pressures seemed to occur leading to greater price instability. For example, consider the three major inflations in the early twentieth century—1903-8, 191314, and 191920. Each of these was preceded by a major harvest failure. Real agricultural output declined by 7 per cent in 19024, by 15 per cent in 19067, by 14 per cent in 191013 (steady fall from a record crop in 1910), and by nearly 30 per cent in 9178Prices began to rise due to the shortage of agricultural goods. In each case, buoyant export demand led to expansion in money supply. These two factors combined to generate very rapid spurts in prices. The Great Depression, when a trade contraction and monetary contraction coincided, was an example of the same kind of maladjustment.

## The Great Depression and India

Many scholars have seen this episode as the starkest example of how the gold exchange standard could harm India's economic interests. To see how, we first need a brief background on the depression itself.

The major industrial economies of the world experienced a downward shift in the demand for their goods and services in the first half of the 1920s. The sources of this contraction differed between the major economies. The demand curve shifted along an upward-sloping supply curve so that both prices and quantities fell. The extent of wage-price flexibility influenced the relative impact on prices and quantities. In general, wages and prices fell to a lesser extent than the quantities in most industrial economies around the time of the Depression. Thus, employment and output contracted quite severely.

As trade declined, there followed a universal monetary contraction. In general, this outcome was a consequence of the gold standard. Given gold-denominated fixed exchange rates, adverse trade or payments led to deflation rather than devaluation. Such a situation, if sufficiently serious, could also lead to a run on foreign exchange reserves, unless interest rates were increased to attract capital. Deflation is neutral on production and employment if monetary changes only alter absolute prices. But it affects production if there is a rise in interest rates. Interest rates (nominal, real, and expected) did rise with further contractionary effects. The Depression deepened, in the US especially, via banking panics that stemmed from a rise in the risk of defaults as the real value of debts increased, and from higher costs of intermediation. The panics themselves were a reflection of the peculiarities of the US financial system. But they shared one precondition with other economies, a general shortage of liquidity.

India shared two conditions with nearly all the other open economies that suffered the shock. First, there was a contraction in exports. And second, the gold exchange standard compelled deflation and real interest rates rose. But India's case differed in its monetary policy. Whereas the threat of deflation forced Britain, like several other economies, to leave the gold standard and devalue, India faced a depressed demand for its tradeables and an uncompromising obligation on account of remittances without the option of being able to devalue. Nationalist opinion in India pushed for devaluation. But British authorities were against it. They feared that devaluation would make the government of India unable to pay the foreign remittances due from it (see also Chapter 8).

The result was a steady and severe deflation, the effect of which was worsened by cuts in government expenditure. Rise in interest rates crowded out some private investment. Private debts and rents increased in value. As time went on, assets, land and gold, began to be sold. A great deal of rural unrest crystallized around debt and rent relief.

The really effective counter-deflationary measures did not come from the government. These were, the export of gold that reflated the economy to some extent, and widespread cuts in money wages that restored profitability. Both these adjustments were taking place in the fist hal of the 13s. Both adustments were stressful or a large number of people.

## Speculating the Causes of Stagnation

Why did colonial India grow so slowly? Before we seek the answers i mich e  heol issues:

(i) Why was the share of investment in national income small (see Table 7.7)?

(ii) Given that the government was in charge of investment in critical public goods such as schools, roads, irrigation, hospitals, etc, why was the government's share in investment small (see Table 7.7)?

(iii) Given that colonial monetary policy was more concerned about zh did such a bas in polic ctualy depress ggregate eman and tional income in India?

There can be two approaches to these questions. The first believes that colonialism was directly responsible for India's underdevelopment. The second blames India's economic structure. But as the government did not do enough to change the structure, it must share the blame to some extent. By far the most popular view is the first one. The second view is not only unpopular but also politically incorrect, for apologists of the empire tended to hold rather extreme versions of this view. Let us consider the substance of these arguments in more detail.

## Colonialism was Responsible

avu by men  vl hal  aka potl nt funds. The most notorious was government remittance. We can conjecture two effects of a relatively large remittance abroad on the government account. First, given revenue, a larger remittance leads to lowr government expenditure within India.Andsecond, foriven net receipt of sterling from abroad, a larger remittance implies lower capacity to import. The period was one when a great deal of the machinery and raw materials needed by industry was imported.

There was also a problem with regard of financing government expenditure. The British government had very limited capacity to collect taxes. Its tax-structure adversely affected mass consumption (see Chapter 8 on both these features). Given limited taxable capacity, a larger remittance implied greater government borrowing abroad. There was nothing as such wrong with government borrowing except that debt service in turn added to the burden of remittances.

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, nationalist criticism of British rule in India focused on these payments abroad. Payments on government account tended to be called 'drain' or 'tribute' and seen as wasteful on the grounds that such resources could be used to create productive assets in India. The most notable spokesman for the 'drain theory' was Dadabhai Naoroji.

While there is no question that factor payments on government account contained a wasteful element, there is no convincing measurement of how large it was. The nationalist writers' attempts to measure it suffered from a serious logical flaw. Virtually any payment they called drain. But clearly not all forms of government remittance were wasteful. When the Indian government paid higher salary to a European for work that an Indian could do for less, there was a waste of resources. Many European bureaucrats were in fact paid fantastic salaries for work that involved power but no great talent. But when the government paid high salary to a European engineer or a university professor who had technical skills not available in India, that expenditure was far from wasteful. In the nineteenth century, a great deal of government expenditure was in fact incurred for services that India needed but could not supply on her own. After all, the two countries were worlds apart in their technical, scientific and managerial capabilities. Unless the justified and unjustifiable payments, in the above sense, are measured separately, one cannot judge how large the 'drain' was. This is virtually impossible given the database. Not only did drain theorists not attempt this separation, many including Naoroji himself were not even aware of the logical problem.

Finally, nationalist writers of the colonial period and many historians of our own time have argued that the colonial monetary policy depressed aggregate demand, (both investment and consumption), and thus national income. This remains a plausible inference about the effects of British monetary policy on India. But how large the effect was, whether the effect was long-term or only became acute at times like the Great Depression, are questions that remain open.

## Economic Structure was Responsible

Morris D. Morris mentions, in the context of industrialization, that pervasive risk and uncertainty discouraged the average investor. Morris focuses on risks that derived from poor information. India was risk-prone in a more fundamental and more crippling sense. Climatic risks, which made the size of the harvest and therefore national income, notoriously uncertain, might discourage productive investment. The future was so uncertain that providing for it could become inconsequential in individual decision-making. If harvests happened to be excessive in one year, individuals were more inclined to spend the extra income on sumptuous marriage feasts and jewellery rather than on irrigation or road-building. It is plausible that the Indians' hunger for gold and silver originated as a response to risks, perhaps as a form of 'precautionary' savings.

A second crippling structural factor was poorly developed institutions, especially financial, such as banks and insurance. Recent scholarship on banking history has shown that credit was in short supply relative to demand in India. A modern banking sector did develop in the nineteenth century. But its reach was limited to the Europeandominated formal sector. And segment of it was plagued by high failure rate. Because of this, not only were savings relatively low but also the fraction available for investors was small. This was adverse for investors who were severely credit constrained, such as smallscale industry (see Chapter 6).

Both these problems can be partly redressed by government expenditure. Investment in common property resources such as irrigation and water management can be a means to reduce risks of cultivation. Implicit or explicit government guarantee has played an important role in the financial development of a number of developed countries in the early period of their industrialization. However, public finance in British India did not meet these needs. Either the government did not diagnose the problems correctly, or its hands were tied by political commitments.

Continuing the same story, colonial India also had certain microeconomic characteristics that might have retarded growth. The most important example is the import of gold and silver. Indians had a desire to posses precious metals the intensity of which had no parallel elsewhere in the world. Other things remaining the same, if gold import becomes larger, two effects can follow. First, savings usable for productive investment can fall. And second, imports, (a large component of which in colonial India was machinery), can fall. Both effects are adverse for investment and economic growth.

These two stories that hold as culprit, colonialism and economic structure respectively, are not mutually exclusive. It is likely that both types of factors wereat work together, but it is impossible o measure their effects separately.

## Conclusion

Colonial India was characterized by low levels of saving and investment. Government investment was not guided by any explicit developmental objective, and was a declining proportion of national income in the twentieth century. The macroeconomy was in an increasingly disturbed state in the interwar period. Parts of the 1920s and the 1930s suffered from unstable and overvalued exchange rate and depression. Ironically, the interwar period was a favourable one for Indian large-scale industry, so that the political lobby demanding autonomy and more purposeful public investment strengthened. But that is a different story (see Chapters 5 and 8).

One particular aspect of colonial Indian macroeconomics that figured prominently in the foregoing discussion but did not receive sufficient space in this chapter, is the government's role in creating modern institutions and infrastructure. It is to this issue that we now turn.

## Annotated Readings

## National Income

The series used most frequently here can be found in S. Sivasubramonian, 'Revised Estimates of the National Income of India, 19001 to 19467', IESHR, 34(2), 1997. Extensive discussion of previous estimates, and problems of estimating various sectoral incomes can be found in the earlier work by this author, National Income of India, 19001 to 1946-7', PhD dissertation, Delhi School of Economics,

University of Delhi, 1965. National income estimates need to make several strong assumptions, and are subject to considerable margins of error. They also need to use several official statistical series on agricultural income as raw material. The reliability of this dataset is open to question. It is necessary, therefore, to know about alternative estimates of national income and the main reasons that they differ. See A. Heston, National Income' in CEHI 2, for a discussion, and Chapter 3 for a description of the problems of measuring agricultural output in colonial India.

For a broad comparative macroeconomic history, see R.W. Goldsmith, The Financial Development of India, Japan, and the United States, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1983.

## Saving-Investment

Bina Roy, 'Estimation of Capital Formation in India', PhD dissertation, Calcutta University, 1975, is the most authoritative work on the subject. But this work remains unpublished and is not easily accessible. The student may see R.W. Goldsmith, The Financial Development of India, 18601977, Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1983, which contains a skilful integration of various macroeconomic databases into as complete a picture as one can get on colonial India. Roy's work is the primary source for Goldsmith's discussion of saving and investment. On foreign investment, see B.R.Tomlinson, 'Foreign Private Investment in India 192050', MAS, 12(4), 1978.

## Government

Goldsmith, Financial Develoment, is sufficient on the relationship between public finance and macroeconomics. More detailed works on public finance will be cited in Chapter 8. M.J.K. Thavaraj, 'Capital Formation in the Public Sector in India: A Historical Study, 1898 in V.K.R.R ape on Natal InAllT, Allied Publishers, 1962.

## Balance of Payments

On foreign trade, see the chapter by K.N. Chaudhuri, Foreign Trade and Balance of Payments' in CEHI 2. Although Chaudhuri's chapter hasbaln pticueecial payments and capital movements, and should not be consulted on these subjects. The most painstaking and detailed estimates of the complete balance of payments are available from the two books by A.K. Banerji, India's Balance of Payments, Asia Publishing House,

Bombay,1962, and Aspects of Indo-British Economic Relations, 185898, Oxford University Press, Bombay, 1982. Banerji's work, however, is primarily statistical and can be heavy reading for the student. The best course would be to combine the present chapter with selected parts of Banerji where the most important items of external transaction are explained and estimated.

## Monetary Policy

Some standard works on the subject are, B.R. Tomlinson, The Political Economy of the Raj, 1914-47, Macmillan, London and Basingstoke, 1979; M. De Cecco, Money and Empire, Blackwell, Oxford, 1974, on pre-war India; G. Balachandran, John Bullion's Empire: Britain's Gold Problem and India between the Wars, Curzon Press, Richmond, 1996. A.K. Bagchi, The Presidency Banks and.the Indian Economy, 18761914, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1989, Ch. 2, contains a good survey.

## The Great Depression and India

The subject has been touched upon in every significant work on India's interwar monetary history. See, for example, Tomlinson, Political Economy, and Balachandran, John Bullion's Empire. D. Rothermund, India in the Great Depression. 192939, Manohar, Delhi, 1992, is a more general review of the relationship between colonial policy and the Depression. Rothermund has researched the Depression in a number of works. A very useful book on the origins of the Depression in Europe and the USA, and its impact on a number of developing countries is his The Global Impact of the Great Depression, Routledge, London, 1996. Chapter 9 of the book deals with India.

## Debates about the Impact of British Rule

Banerji, Aspects of Indo-British Economic Relations, Chs 8-9, contains a survey of drain theory and its significance. Banerji's own views on the subject are debatable. Bagchi, The Presidency Banks, touches on the controversies surrounding government remittances. The works on the Great Depression cited above also deal with the biases and harmful aspects of colonial policy.

## National Accounts

Read United Nations, A System of National Accounts, New York, 1968, pp. 3-6 and Appendix B.
