> 来源：The economic history of India _ 1857-1947 -- Tirthankar Roy -- New Delhi, New York, India, 2000 -- IRL Press at Oxford University Press -- isbn13 9780195651546 -- 1dcc1a7a5317bc0fd8a747bbd332eee
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The economic history of India _ 1857-1947 -- Tirthankar Roy -- New Delhi, New York, India, 2000 -- IRL Press at Oxford University Press -- isbn13 9780195651546 -- 1dcc1a7a5317bc0fd8a747bbd332eee.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Role of the Government

T'he nationalist writers accused the colonial rulers of resisting poli-Lcies that might benefit India and Indian enterprise, and pursuing those policies that benefited Britain.' There cannot be any dispute over the point that the British government had British economic interests in mind while ruling India. However, that does not necessarily establish the nationalist thesis. Imputing a one-point economic programme to the colonial regime simplifies the nature of the rule and ignores its internal contradictions. In the case of policies that aided freer trade or easier capital movements, British and Indian interests did not necessarily conflict. And, in many cases of government intervention, the motives behind specific policies and their actual effects were quite different.

Research on various aspects of policy suggests that the potentiality of colonial rule to modernize the Indian economy were constrained in two ways. The protection of the interests of the British economy was a precondition to any policy-making in India. Also, the nature of Indian society limited the government's ability and willingness to introduce radical changes. Remaining within these parameters, the British rule appears to have done far more than what its predecessor regimes and contemporary Indian regimes were able to do. But it did far less than what was needed for a 'big push' or what it possibly could if it were not bound by some of the imperial obligations.

The purpose of this chapter is to describe the government's contributions to economic development, and to point out where these contributions fell short. The chapter is divided into five sections. The first answers two simple questions. What were the relevant policies? And who decided them? The second and the third sections deal with trade and government finance respectively. The fourth discusses public investment in infrastructure and institutions. The fifth describes government policy in the major princely states. A concluding section returns to the following general questions. Was there a specifically colonial element in these policies? Would India have been better off with a different set of policies?

## Policies and Policy-making

Basically, policies that affect economic growth can be divided into two heads: state intervention in the working of markets, and investment by the government in infrastructure, institutions and welfare. Promoting industrialization by using protective tariffs is an example of the former. Investment in major forms of public goods such as education, health-care and sanitation are an example of the latter. Policies of the former kind control competition and gains from trade. Policies on government investment create capability of individuals and economic systems.

After 1858, Indian affairs were decided at three levels—the India Office at London headed by a Secretary of State who was a member of the British cabinet, the Viceroy who headed the government of India seated in Calcutta until 1911 and Delhi thereafter, and the provincial governments headed usually by Governors. These three levels of governance did not function in concert. Their priorities were different. Imperial priorities such as trade or defence were foremost at London. Calcutta was relatively more concerned with Indian finances. And the provinces were concerned with local developmental or welfare related issues. As and when British and Indian interests seemed to conflict, these three levels opposed each other. In the nineteenth century, the India Office won some major battles. But the balance tilted in favour of India in the twentieth century. This discord was at the heart of Indian policy-making as we shall see from time to time.

## Trade Policy

Until the First World War, trade between India and Britain was effectively free of tariffs. Free trade was a powerful ideology that influenced many colonial administrators. The idea also served the interests of the exporters of British manufacturers. In this group belonged the Lancashire textile millowners. Any attempt to impose or increase an import duty in India was resisted strongly by this lobby because India was one of the most important markets for British textiles. India bought about 30 per cent of British textile export in 1865. On the conflict regarding issue of customs duty, India's financial interests were represented by the government in Calcutta and the interests of British export furthered by the India Office at London. Calcutta wanted to use customs duty as a means to reinforce Indian finances. London denied it that freedom until the First World War. Until then, rates of import duty on textiles were low. Such duties were removed and reimposed from time to time, and were partly offset by excise on competing goods produced by the mills in Bombay.

During the war India's contribution to the war effort was critical for London. After the war, the government of India's point of view on the financial question could not be ignored. Tariffs were a convenient way to raise revenues at a time of strained finances. Partly because of the war, the need for state aid to industrialization in India was beginning to be recognized. Indian business had become a significant voice by then. It made a claim for state aid to industry in the form of protective tariffs. Indian sentiments in favour of industrialization were growing too. And finally, the influence of Lancashire on British policy, or indeed within the imperial economic system, was on the decline. At the same time, Japan began to emerge as a competitor of Britain in Asian markets. These shifts eroded the resistance to raising customs tariffs. There was steady and significant increase in average tariff rates after 1920.

Protection for industry has already been discussed in Chapter 5. Briefly, protection was given very hesitantly and in only a few cases. Tariffs led to significant expansion in those industries that did receive protection. But the experience also illustrates the dangers of using tariffs as an instrument of industrialization. In theory, protection gives an 'infant' industry the chance to expand, utilize economies of scale, and eventually become internationally competitive. In some cases such logic did work in India. Perhaps the most important example is the Tata Steel in the first few decades of its history. In reality, protection was sometimes given to producing units that were rather old and poorly managed, such as many of the cotton mills of Bombay. In any case, the success of protection in improving efficiency could not be tested in near future. For, soon after independence tarifs were made, almost with a vengeance, a major instrument of industrialization. The average rate was raised steeply and universally. This regime remained in force for 40 more years. When it did end, large segments of the Indian industry built in the meantime had become globally uncompetitive.

If the tariff experience is ambiguous, there is much stronger ground to argue that the government's control on the Indian exchange rate hurt India's exports in the interwar period. On the question of exchange rate control, London's concerns took precedence over those of Indian commerce. It has been argued that in the interwar period, the two were clearly in conflict. This episode has already been described i

## Public Finance

The government's capacity to make productive investment was constrained by its rather primitive public finances. To understand the naturethi eaarsu l of public finance.

## Structure of Revenue and Expenditure

The structure of revenue and expenditure will be described by using data that combines central and provincial finances. At any time in the nineteenth century, the most important tax was land revenue. In 18589, land tax was as high as 50 per cent of total revenues. Next in importance were two commodity taxes of a rather special nature. One was levied on export of opium, and the other on the sale of salt. Government had a monopoly on the production of opium, and a near monopoly on the production of salt. Together, the taxes collected on these two items accounted for 24 per cent of revenues in 18589. More modern types of taxes such as the income tax, customs and excise accounted for a small proportion of revenue (about 12 per cent in 18589). Two features of this tax structure were against the modern principles of taxation: it was regressive; and it was income-inelastic. A tax on salt was incident upon rich and poor alike, for both consumed the same quantity. On the other hand, the limited reach of the income tax left many prosperous people out of the tax net. Salt tax also meant, taxing a commodity whose demand was relatively income-inelastic. That is, even as the economy expanded, tax revenues from salt would not expand automatically.

Over the next 90 years, and especially after the First World War, this pattern of taxation changed. The importance of land tax decreased steadily to about 20 per cent of revenue in the 1920s. The opium tax became negligible and salt tax was a much smaller source than before. On the other hand, income tax, customs and excise had expanded their combined share to over 50 per cent. There were two major political-economic factors associated with the decline of land tax and increase in the other sources.

First, land tax as a proportion of the value of agricultural production declined from possibly 10 per cent of net output in the middle or early nineteenth century to less than 5 in the 1930s. Sustained campaign by associations of landlords against taxation was one factor behind the fall in the importance of land tax. Another factor was the income-inelastic nature of the tax. During the latter half of the nineteenth century agricultural output grew in value, but land tax did not grow to the same extent. Besides, in permanently settled areas, the tax amount was fixed. Attempts to revoke permanent settlement on financial grounds did not succeed.

Second, financial stringency had forced the government to experiment with customs and income tax right from the mid nineteenth century. In this effort the government could succeed only in the interwar period. The conflict over customs duty has been related in the previous section. Income tax was again an area of considerable debate. The government simply did not have the machinery to implement a tax on self-employed people of all kinds. There were some experiments in the nineteenth century, but no real and permanent income tax emerged from these experiments. The groups that could be more easily targeted and assessed were those closest to the government. These were the landlords, government employees, and owners of modern industry many of whom were Europeans. The landlords stoutly resisted being taxed. The resistance of the other two lobbies is less visible, but can be presumed to have been at work. Over time, these groups expanded, diversified, and their resistance to taxation could not be sustained. Income tax, therefore, increased in importance.

For most of this period tax revenue as proportion of national income remained very small and almost static at about 57 per cent. Small as it was, the proportion was falling in the interwar period (see Table 7. in Chapter7). Thus, the shifts in the structure of taxes did not make the government richer. Nor did they enable it to expand relative to the economy. The government continued to have very lmited spending power. It also had to rely steadily n borrowing.

TABLE 8.1  
Composition of Government Revenue and Expenditure, 1858, 1900, and the 1920s
<table><tr><td>Per cent of total revenue</td><td>1858-9</td><td>1920-30 (average annual)</td></tr><tr><td>Customs</td><td>8</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>Land revenue</td><td>50</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td>Salt and opium</td><td>24</td><td>negligible</td></tr><tr><td>Excise</td><td>4</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>Income tax</td><td>0.3</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Per cent of total expenditure</td><td>1900-1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Defence</td><td>22</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>Administration</td><td>24</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Debt service</td><td>4</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Public works</td><td>17</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Education</td><td>2</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Health</td><td>2</td><td>3</td></tr></table>

Sources:18589 and 19001 Dharma Kumar, 'The Fiscal System' in CEHI 2, Tables 12.4 and 12.8. 192030 calculated in Tirthankar Roy, 'The Role of the State in Intin Deveon:  u  Interar Sou  Southest IESHR, 33(4), 1996.

To this fundamental constraint of limited revenue was added heavy expenditure commitment on defence, civil administration and debt service. The Indian army was large and costly relative to the government's resources. It was also unproductive from India's point of view, being used not only for India's own defence but also to fight Britain's wars almost anywhere in the world. Modern administrative institutions are a positive and valuable contribution of British rule in India. But as the proponents of 'drain' rightly argued, the cost of imported administrative personnel was frequently excessive. Debt service was an expense imposed by the poverty of the state itself.

Usually, not more than about 20 per cent of total expenditure went to investment, or to the creation and repair of national assets. If we consider only net investment, that is creation of new assets, the percentage was much smaller because depreciation accounted for about one-third of the gross investment in the prewar period, and about 5060 per cent of gross investment in the middle of the 1930s. The percentage of investment in expenditure fell quickly towards the end of the interwar period, as debt service and administrative commitments took increasing priority over investment (Table 8.2).

TABLE 8.2  
Gross Public Investment as a Proportion of Public Expenditure, 18981938
<table><tr><td>(per cent)</td></tr><tr><td>Investment—expenditure ratio</td></tr><tr><td>18989 to 19134 23.5</td></tr><tr><td>1919-20 to 192930 23.4</td></tr><tr><td>1930-1 to 19378 15.7</td></tr></table>

Source: M.J.K. Thavaraj, 'Capital Formation in the Public Sector in India: A Historical Study, 18981938', in V.K.R.V. Rao (ed.), Papers on National Income and Allied Topics, Allied Publishers, Bombay, 1962.

In the pre-war period, public investment was mainly financed from public savings. Nearly 90 per cent of the average gross investment was thus met out of the government's own surplus of revenue over current expenditure. But in the interwar period, the percentage dropped sharply to about 65 per cent. Net increase in liability to meet public investment rose from an average of 10 per cent of investment in the pre-war period to about 35 per cent in the interwar. The increase in net debt contracted was not a uniform one. Roughly the contribution of public debt to investment can be periodized as follows:

19 to 190607mall scale wih annual increass in liliy in the negative

19078 to 190910 :large increase in liability

19101 to 19134 : small and negative increase

191920 to 19312 :consistently positive and large increases liability

19323 : large negative increase.

In short, 190710 and 191931 were the two major periods of rising indebtedness. The later part of the 1930s saw net repayment.

The major sectors to draw capital were irrigation, roads, railways and telegraph. During the period of study, these four sectors continued to attract the major part of investments (Table 8.3). However, increasingly from the interwar period, such investments went into depreciation rather than creation of new assets. Public investment in railways was well-balanced in the long run. But investment in irrigation; roads and power was quite unevenly distributed. There was a correlation between the initial inaccessibility  a regin, it size, and the share of the region in public investment. Burma, for both reasons, was a major recipient of funds. Within British India, western and southern India received much more funds than did eastern and northern India. Further, the composition of public investment in northern India was dominated by irrigation, whereas that in western and southern India was more even.

TABLE 8.3  
Sectoral Composition of Public Investment, 1860-1946
<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">1860-1 to 1918-9</td><td colspan="2">191920 to 1946-7</td></tr><tr><td>Rs million</td><td>Per cent of total</td><td>Rs million</td><td>Per cent of total</td></tr><tr><td>Irrigation</td><td>1227</td><td>22.6</td><td>1968</td><td>18.6</td></tr><tr><td>Roads</td><td>1570</td><td>23.7</td><td>2237</td><td>21.2</td></tr><tr><td>Power</td><td>0</td><td>0.0</td><td>199</td><td>1.9</td></tr><tr><td>Railways</td><td>3818</td><td>53.7</td><td>6168</td><td>58.3</td></tr><tr><td>Total of the above</td><td>6615</td><td>100.0</td><td>10572</td><td>100.0</td></tr></table>

Source: M.J.K. Thavaraj, 'Regional Imbalances and Public Investment in India (1860- 1947), Social Scientist, 4, 1971.

TABLE 8.4  
Regional Distribution of Public Investment in Irrigation, Roads and Power, 1860-1946
<table><tr><td>(per cent of total)</td></tr><tr><td>oquog</td></tr><tr><td>MMpr polund Baung Bfun Soue suis Tot t</td></tr><tr><td>16.2 21.7 11.9 1.8 21.9 5.8 20.7</td></tr><tr><td>18601 to 19189 16.6 15.5 8.8 8.8 24.0 6.9 19.2 100.0</td></tr><tr><td>191920 to 19467 100.0</td></tr></table>

Source: Thavaraj, 'Regional Imbalances'.

In the nineteenth century, the main focus of productive investment by the state was irrigation, railways, roads, and the telegraph. There were several factors motivating this infrastructural investment. First, business interests both in India and abroad urged modern systems of transport and communication to be set up in India. The influence of Lancashire textile millowners behind the construction of a railway

## 254 | THE ECONOMIC HISTORY OF INDIA, 1857-1947

system in India is a well-known example. Their interest was in cheaper transportation of Indian cotton. Second, Britain being the pioneer manufacturer and user of these new technologies, to some extent their extension in India was a natural outcome. The knowledge and the capital to build railways or the telegraph were more cheaply available to India than many other underdeveloped countries of that time. Third, famines in the nineteenth century exposed the extreme vulnerability of a monsoon-dependent agrarian population to harvest failure and starvation. The means to reduce such vulnerability were irrigation for efficient usage of water, railways to transport food quickly from surplus to deficit regions, and a system of public works where famine-hit people could be employed for wages. Public works, in these diverse ways, became bound to the idea of famine relief. Fourth, the pre-existing infrastructure of India was very backward given the size and complexity of the land. For example, the road system the British inherited was extremely primitive. In part, the British in India were trying to deal with the failure of past Indian regimes to build worthwhile public assets. Fifth, the needs of defence were initially an important consideration behind investing in the telegraph and to an extent the railways.

By the twentieth century, the public works drive had largely spent itself. On the other hand, the demand for welfare expenditure was gaining ground politically. This demand arose partly from the realization that education was a means of social advancement that had been neglected by the colonial rulers. In a way, it was a result of political decentralization after 1919 whereby provincial budgets, which were responsible for education and health, became more exposed to local political pressures. Extremely high levels of lliteracy and mortality in India in about 1920 showed that being a colony of Britain for over half a century had done little to enable India to approach British standards of social development. The rise in the proportion of public spending on education and health in the interwar period (Table 8.1) reflects some attempt to redress this neglect of social infrastructure. The attempt, however, was a very limited one. For, the government's poverty and expenditure commitments worsened progressively.

## The Political and Institutional Context

Public finance during the colonial period was influenced by certain long-term political-economic variables. Two were especially important: the federal structure, and the economy's exposure to risks.

During the regime of the East India Company, the finances of the three major presidencies were more or less autonomous. But there was a tendency to centralize control over state finances. By 1882, the basic structure of financial federalism was well-established. The centre was responsible for certain heads of revenue and certain types of expenditure. The provinces were responsible for some others. A few other taxes were divided up between the centre and the provinces. Customs, salt tax, opium tax, railway income were the main revenues raised by the centre. The provinces had full control over receipts of provincial administrative departments such as law and justice or education. Land revenue and excise were the most important taxes that were divided between the two. Only the centre could borrow, the provinces could not. As for expenditure, basically the centre looked after defence whereas the provinces were in charge of local administration, education, health, etc.

The history of federal finance was one of constant struggle between the centre and the provinces over heads of revenue. The provinces felt that they were given too few sources of income and too many heads of expenditure. Another source of tension was great inequalities among the provinces in per capita tax burden and per capita expenditure. Generally, provinces with Permanent Settlement such as those in eastern India raised less revenue on average and spent less. Provinces such as Bombay or Madras raised more on the average and spent more. Settlement pattern, however, is only one determinant of these inequalities. There were probably other reasons too that now remain obscure.

The Government of India Acts of 1919 and 1935, and the legislative assemblies that were created after the 1919 Act, both restructured federal finance and exposed it to organized pressures from elected representatives of the people. The divided heads of revenue were abolished. Land revenue was given over to the provinces. The centre took the income tax. The central budget now had to be balanced by contributions for the provinces, which added another bone of contention. These changes did little to meet the basic grievance of the provinces. Namely, they were given inflexible sources of revenue, but were responsible for expenditures that had to expand with growth of population and income. These complaints were not unfounded. Therefore, the 1935 Act went a little further in giving a larger share to the provinces. The idea of a five-yearly Finance Commission to review the structure of federal finance, an institution that continues today, was another result of this Act.

(per cent)

TABLE 8.5 Shares of the Centre and the Provinces in Gross Public Investment, 192037
<table><tr><td></td><td>Centre</td><td>Provinces</td><td>Total (including municipalities and local governments)</td></tr><tr><td>19201 to 19293</td><td>56</td><td>35</td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>19301 to 19378</td><td>46</td><td>39</td><td>100</td></tr></table>

Source:Thavaraj, 'Capital Formation in the Public Sector in India.

In general, the government scrupulously balanced its budget. That is, it balanced current revenue with current expenditure. It did need to borrow substantial sums in London mainly to finance the construction of the railways and irrigation. Many Indian economists have criticized these borrowings on two grounds. These imposed a heavy debt service obligation. And these borrowings helped the London capital market and deprived India of a chance to stimulate its own capital market by means of government securities. The former charge is doubtful. For the capital receipts after all were spent on creation of valuable assets that yielded income to the government. The latter charge does have some merit.

The balance between revenue and expenditure tended to be upset by famines, wars and depressions. The wars fought by the East India Company and the uprising of 1857 left a large burden of debt. The famines of 1876 and 1896 also added to debt. Usually these were met from current revenues without serious problems. The large increases in military expenditure during the First World War not only forced the government to borrow, but since the London market was no longer easy to borrow from, the government was forced to turn towards Indian sources. During none of these episodes, was the Indian government's creditworthiness in question, abroad or at home. The Great Depression, however, saw a major crisis in this respect. Political unrest and the weak export situation reduced confidence abroad in Indian securities. The government could in theory devalue the rupee and stimulate the economy. But such a step would have increased the value of India's net government remittance abroad. Fearing that India may fail to meet this commitment, authorities in London prevailed on India not to devalue but to cut expenditure instead. The outcome was a massive contraction in government expenditure that intensified the effects of the depression (see also Chapter 7).

The Second World War again faced India with a deficit situation, but this episode was unique in several respects. The government had to spend much larger proportions of the budget on defence, not only o  hal uba r of repayment from Britain later. While taxes and borrowings were increased, these were insufficient to bridge the deficit. By now India had a central bank and substantial monetary autonomy. Consequently, money supply increased to finance the deficit as never before. While money supply expanded and the nominal demand for goods expanded, the supply of essential goods including foodgrains was diverted to the war effort. The net efect was, massive inflation, serious erosion of real incomes especially of the poor people who found food scarcer and costlier, and a fall in the burden of private debt. An extreme example of the resultant hardships is the Bengal famine of 1943 in which some half a million people died of starvation. The last days of the war saw government control on supplies of essential commodities. This was the precursor of the public distribution system with which independent India has been so familiar. The end of the war also saw steady liquidation of India's accumulated foreign debt. This was a result of Britain's obligations to India on account of the war. In fact, India entered independence with a very large credit balance in sterling.

## Infrastructure and Institutions

The most important legacy of British rule was modern infrastructure and public goods that it created. The railways, the ports, major irrigation systems, the telegraph, sanitation and medical care, the universities, the postal system, the courts of law, were assets India could not believably have acquired in suchi extent and quality had it not developed close political links with Britain.

The government also played a role in information-gathering systems, industrial development, legislation, and higher education and scientific education. In scale and effect, government investment in these areas was both limited and disjointed. Major recent works in these areas will be cited in the list of readings. But these will not be described in detail in the chapter.

The initial motivation behind productive public expenditure was rarely 'development' or welfare in the modern sense. Irrigation was connected with the dependence on land revenue. Railways and telegraph were connected with military needs and foreign trade. English education in its first years with the demand for English-educated employees in government offices. But it would be wrong to believe that, once built, such assets only served narrow imperial interests. Each of these forms of capital had immense externalities. Once they were set up, they were in the nature of public goods. That is, they were open to anyone who chose to use them. In the long run, the canals helped the farmers more than it did the revenue department. English education influenced social outlook. The telegraph was a boon for small and large Indian business firms. The railways enabled vast number of labourers to migrate in search of better work and mitigated the effect of famines. Nevertheless, the absence of a unified policy imposed unevenness in the way these assets developed. There was lack of synchronization over time, between regions, and between different types of assets.

## Irrigation

## History of Policy

Irrigation was seen as a fundamental duty of the state by nearly all regimes ruling South Asia over long periods of time. The two important examples of this commitment are cited here. When the Company took control of the upper Gangetic plains, extensive network of irrigation channels existed in the western part of the river Jamuna. This network was attributed to Firoz Shah Tughlaq, and selectively restored by the East India Company's engineers from 1821. The second example is the 'grand anicut' on the Cauvery in the south attributed to the Chola rulers. Sir Arthur Cotton, who was the main spirit and the technical brain behind the Company's irrigation projects in south India, revived it. Such universal recognition of large-scale conservation of water arose from the region's dependence on the monsoon rains and the consequent risk of famines. Conserving or redistributing water not only created productive assets for cultivators, it was also a means of famine relief and insurance against starvation. Apart from reducing the chances of harvest failure, irrigation conferred several other critical advantages. It made multiple cropping possible. It freed the farmers from having to use low-yield drought-resistant seeds. And it enabled application of more fertilizers. Some of these aspects of irrigation were recognized early, and major irrigation projects were begun during the East India Company's rule. Excluding some years of financial uncertainty and shifts in policy, irrigation remained a major duty of the state throughout the period of study.

Te began to compete for limited public funds.

In the nineteenth century, the basic construction consisted of canals cut out of perennial rivers in north India, and anicuts² constructed on the major south Indian rivers. In the north, Punjab, Sind and western UP are the examples of the success of canals in spreading access to water over wide areas of formerly water-scarce territories. In the south, canals mainly redistributed monsoon water, and did not necessarily improve water supply in lean seasons. The north Indian canals were concentrated in areas serviceable by the two major Himalayan river systems, Ganga-Jamuna, and the tributaries of the Indus. Some of the great northern projects, as we have seen, were pre-British constructions restored by the East India Company. The Bari Doab Canal, was a new construction first started as a way of employing disbanded Sikh soldiers after Punjab was annexed to British India. Still others, such as the Ganges Canal in western UP or the projects in Sind were new projects started during Crown rule from mainly economic objectives. The most dramatic effect of these canals was the planned 'colonization' of vast areas of wastes and pastures by migrant cultivators. In Punjab these 'canal colonies' came up between 1890 and 1930. In the twentieth century, major projects included the Sarda Canal in western UP, the Sukkur barrage in Sind, and the Mettur Barrage in the south. The twentieth century also saw increasing attention being paid to the promotion of small-scale and private sources of water supply such as wells. The shift from large to small water sources was partly induced by financial stringency, and partly by the perceived dangers of canal irrigation. Attempts also began in this period to harness the hydroelectric potential of river water.

In the regime of the East India Company, canal construction was left to the engineering department of the army. Lord Dalhousie established the Public Works Department (1854) and entrusted canals to this department. For a few years after the mutiny ended and Crown rule began, the department was busy with army and administrative constructions. But a discussion started almost immediately on its long-term goals, and it was widely agreed, by authorities in India and in London, that irrigation was going to remain one of the primary goals. It was at this time that the first statement of an irrigation policy was made in a series of official writings. A broad distinction was made between those works that were built for purely administrative or famine relief purposes (later named 'protective' works), and those built to increase agricultural production (later called 'productive' works). The former class was not expected to yield any income, though they might save the government money that would have to be spent on famine relief if a famine occurred. The latter class could be commercially profitable for the government. That irrigation could be remunerative in both these senses, as money saved and money generated, had already been demonstrated by a number of major works. For large projects that were too costly to be financed by the current revenue of the government, and which therefore needed loans to be raised in London, it was essential that the projects yield at least the interest on these loans.

What did this yield consist of? Irrigation can raise the productivity of land, and therefore, income of the cultivators. The water that raised incomes was charged at a certain rate paid out of that income. This tax accrued to the Public Works Department, and was calculated in the rate of return on capital invested in irrigation projects. However, for such projects that had come up much before the Department itself no proper calculation of increased income or rate of return was possible. Ön the other hand, increased income from a plot of land also increased the rental value of that land. Land revenue was supposed to reflect the rental value. In areas not permanently settled the government could realize this value. In ryotwari areas irrigated land was charged higher land revenue. However, no exact calculation was possible of how much the rental value of land actually increased due to irrigation. Nevertheless, from time to time, land revenue on account of irrigation was estimated as the indirect return on irrigation projects.

The government spending money on large projects with doubtful return was never a favoured idea with policy-makers for India in London. In 1878, the Select Committee on East India Public Works stated that large-scale irrigation projects were by and large a failure both commercially and in preventing famines. Almost at the same time, the 1880s Famine Commission gave a more informative and balanced picture of irrigation projects in India. The Commission concluded that irigation projects were on balance profitable for the government, yielding about 6 per cent on capital, but only after land revenue collected is considered.

This question of what monetary returns the irrigation schemes really gnerated or the government ihrouded n peculation. Th calculated rates of return vary widely between projects and regions. They also vary widely depending on whether or not the revenue generated or interest payments are incorporated into the calculations. A general pattern, however, did exist. Major works in Madras on the Godavary and Cauvery deltas yielded good returns. Works in Sind were also profitable. The overall return on works in north India was positive but not large. Ill-conceived projects in Bengal, Orissa and Deccan yielded negative returns. Some of these projects were first constructed by private companies for rates of return guaranteed by the government, in the model of railway construction. The government later purchased them at unjustifiably high prices. Generally in irrigation policy there was a powerful opinion against private enterprise. It was felt that allowing the private sector in water supply would complicate the question of property rights in water.

Partly at least, the rates of return reflected the types of projects in different region and, in turn, the topography of different regions. The East India Company's works in south India were generally wellpaying. But one of the biggest among new projects taken up in north India, the Ganges Canal, was running at a loss in the 1860s. It was foud ah     h phy of Madras, which allowed the construction of simple low-cost 'anicuts' on river beds to irrigate large areas. The canals in such a system could also be used for navigation during lean seasons. In north India, on the other hand, irrigation over a large area required extensive masonry work and many more bridges. And canal navigation was not a source of revenue as road traffic was already quite developed in the region.

## The Economic Effects of Canal Irrigation

The non-monetary returns on irrigation projects, such as famine relief or increased prosperity for cultivators were also mixed. Canalirrigated area as a percentage of cropped area was not very different between Madras and Punjab in 1900. Yet, Madras suffered far more from famines. The reason was, canals as such could not prevent water scarcity in the dry months if the region suffered from a general shortage of rains. In other words, the natural supply of water and the capacity of canals to prevent famines were correlated. In several parts of the canal-served agrarian countryside, there were dramatic improvements in wealth and income of the people. But the human and economic costs of these extensive canal projects were also large. These costs were incurred due to a persistent engineering defect, namely poor drainage of excess water. As a consequence north India was afflicted by saline deposits (locally called reh) in certain parts, and increase in malaria in others. The authorities knew about these costs. But they felt that the overall return justified them.

On the net effects of canal irrigation, there is an interesting difference in points of view between the two authorities on the subject, Elizabeth Whitcombe and Ian Stone. Both have worked on the Ganga— Jamuna Doab, the hub of most controversies. There is not much dispute that canal irrigation turned near-desert waste lands in Sind and Punjab into cultivable land. The benefits for agriculture were indisputable. But then, these were initially water-scarce regions. The Doab, on the other hand, was different. It was a relatively slopeless plain hemmed in by major rivers. It had a high water-table already exploited through well-irrigation. Here, the blessings of a new system of water supply were mixed.

Whitcombe has argued that the environmental effects were on balance adverse for cultivation. In this tract canals tended to spread water and block natural drainage routes. This led to waterlogging. The excess saturation led to a problem of saline deposits, called reh, which reduced fertility in large tracts. It also worsened the incidence of malaria. As for cultivation, the canals induced a bias for cash crops which reduced self-sufficiency in food. The canals (compared to the wells) encouraged over-cropping and attracted pastoral groups to cultivate. As a result the quality of livestock declined. Cash requirements to pay for the use of canals, enhanced rentals, changes in composition of crops, contributed to increasing rural inequality. This assessment provides support for the left-nationalist view of colonialism as an essentially negative form of intervention.

While these environmental distortions cannot be disputed, whether or not they outweighed the positive effects of increasing peasant income and wealth can be questioned. In a more detailed study of irrigation in the region, Stone argues that compared to the traditional irrigation technology, the canals had significant direct and indirect advantages. Canals enabled rise in yield per acre, reduced the impact of harvest fluctuations, raised average living standards, and encouraged limited industrialization, especially sugar-refining. Canal water, however, was distributed unevenly among peasants contrary to official expectations. Its actual distribution had much to do with local social and political structures that the colonial state was too weak to change.

## Transportation

Until the mid-nineteenth century, the most common form of longdistance transportation of cargo within the country consisted of pack animals and small sailing vessels on navigable rivers. Large trains of pack animals were driven by the nomadic Banjaras on roads that connected western India with the eastern and northern regions. For short-distance trade and travel, the common means of transportation were palanquins, smal river-crafts and bullock carts. The older systems of long-distance trade were highly time and labour intensive. It is not surprising that the railways destroyed them without much resistance. While the railways cheapened long-distance travel, local and short-distance transportation saw rather little government investment in the British period. In this sphere, the cruder means of transport survived until well into the post-independence period.

In 1849, the Government of India entered an agreement with some British railway companies to construct railways in India on a government-guaranteed minimum return of 5 per cent on paid-up capital. Lord Dalhousie was the Viceroy of India at the time. The beginning of a number of major infrastructural commitments—the telegraph, the railways, the Ganges Canal, postal system, universities, and the Public Works Department itself-owed much to his ambition to extend Western technology in India, and to his political ambitions as well. The idea of the guarantee was to ensure investment in a venture that would be normally seen as risky because it consumed so much capital for an uncertain return. The guaranteed profit imposed a fiscal burden on the state. But since many crucial lines in India (nearly all those in south India for example) ran at a loss for many decades after their construction, it is probable that without the guarantee these would not have been built at all. Railway construction began on a large scale in the next decade, and was continued almost exclusively by the private sector until 1870. By 1870, Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and Delhi had become interconnected by the broad gauge' system. Thereafter, the fiscal burden became too heavy to bear due to the depreciation of the rupee, and the rise in interest rates on government borrowing abroad to pay for guarantees. Increasingly, therefore, the government itself entered railway construction. The first major 'metre-gauge' lines were a product of direct government investment. Later in the nineteenth century, the government started buying out some of the 'guaranteed companies'. During the 1920s, all railways in India were brought under direct government management.

By the time the Indian railway network was one of the largest in the world, it had also had considerable impact on costs of commerce and travel in the entire region. Table 8.6 shows the rapid pace of railway development in India, and the growing intensity of railway usage.

TABLE 8.6  
Selected Railway Statistics, 1860—1940
<table><tr><td></td><td>1860</td><td>1880</td><td>1900</td><td>1920</td><td>1940</td></tr><tr><td>Total route miles</td><td>838</td><td>8995</td><td>23627</td><td>35406</td><td>41852</td></tr><tr><td>Route miles per &#x27;000 square miles</td><td>0.53</td><td>5.69</td><td>14.94</td><td>22.39</td><td>25.96</td></tr><tr><td>Route miles per million persons</td><td>3.40</td><td>35.00</td><td>82.90</td><td>115.90</td><td>107.00</td></tr><tr><td>Passengers carried (in million)</td><td>n.a.</td><td>48</td><td>166</td><td>524</td><td>604</td></tr><tr><td>Goods carried (net million tonnes)</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>n.a.</td><td>86</td><td>129</td></tr><tr><td>Employment in railways</td><td>16789</td><td>154108</td><td>338041</td><td>727184</td><td>1046843</td></tr></table>

Note: n.a. stands for 'not available'  
Source: M.D. Morris and C.B. Dudley, 'Selected Railway Statistics for the Indian Subcontinent (India, Pakistan and Bangladesh), 185319467' Artha Vijnana, 17(3), 1975.

The economic effects of the railways can be classified into two types. First, the railways had significant forward and backward linkages with other sectors of the economy. Second, there was great reduction in average transportation costs. In many industrial countries, railway construction stimulated the engineering industry, the financial markets, and even the labour markets by facilitating migration and by employing large number of wage-earners directly. In India, the first of these three effects was present only on a limited scale until the First World War, when nearly all of the inputs required for railway construction was imported. The government had built railway workshops for repair and production of parts. These were capable of high-skilled work. But they were not intensively used for that purpose. Coal mining was probably the most important case of backward linkage of the railways. After the War, a progressive Indianization in i pa  T source of demand or the basic metal industris was significant in the interwar period. Tata Steel is the most important example. The second of these effects was almost non-existent in India, since the major part of the capital raised to finance the Indian railways came from the London money market. There is no question that in 1850, Indian money markets could not conceivably supply resources for a new venture on such a large scale. But even after the railways had become an established field of private investment, the government did not seriously try to raise capital in India. The third effect on employment and labour mobility was of great importance indeed. At 1947, the Indian railways employed over a million people, whereas rest of the modern industry together employed just about two million. In other words, this sector was the single largest employer in the organized sector, a distinction maintained even today. Railways themselves were a major employer of migrant labour. Railways facilitated, even opened up, the major channels of labour migration into the cities and plantations. The plantation areas tended to be located in formerly inaccessible terrain that the railways now connected with the cities.

The reduction in transportation costs can be measured. Import and export trade in real terms increased enormously as a result of the reduction. Because transportation costs became a smaller proportion of the price, supply of goods now responded to much narrower differences between local and world price than before. Raw cotton and hides and skins quickly rose in importance as traded commodities thanks to this factor. In turn, this trend transformed the economies of cotton producing regions. Railways also facilitated integration of markets. This is evident from declining regional variability in prices of foodgrains. In other words, supply of goods moved faster in response to relative prices. In nationalist writings, the railways were blamed for intensifying the late nineteenth century famines by facilitating easy export of foodgrains. Scholars have, in fact, attributed the remarkable let-up in the incidence of famines after 1900 to easier interregional crop movements that the railways made possible. There is no reason why the railways should create scarcity in one period and sufficiency in another. It is more likely that the adverse role of the railways in the late nineteenth century famines is exaggerated (see also the section 'food security' in Chapter 3).

A systematic history of roads and road transport in India remains to be written. From the little research that is available on the nature of long-distance trade before the British came to India, it is fair to conclude that good and safe roads were an extremely scarce resource in pre-colonial and early-colonial India. The poor conditions of the roads partly reflected limited engineering capability in bridging the numerous rivers. The East India Company restored and constructed some major roads for military purposes. But regular allocation of funds for roads did not begin until the 1830s.

Thereafter as well, roads were given a low priority in government investment. Road length grew at a much slower pace than the railways. In 1931, the length of metalled roads as a ratio of population was as low as 0.4 miles per thousand persons. For a comparison, the ratio was above 1 in much of contemporary developing Asia (1.5 in Ceylon and 2.2 in Malaya). The public works in colonial India were clearly biased in favour of the railways at the cost of roads. There were possibly three reasons for this. First, road construction was said to have been too costly in India given the terrain, the rivers, and the high repair costs due to the monsoons. Secondly, roads brought the government no direct monetary return whereas the railways did.3 The government for some reason did not seriously explore the possibility of involving private enterprise in constructing a network of tolled roads. Third, the lobbies that pushed the government into investment in modern transportation such as the Lancashire mills clearly wanted railways. That is, they wanted systems that would cheapen long-distance trade. They were not interested in roads that would facilitate local trade and travel the more. The opportunity cost of the railways was a relatively high level of backwardness in local transportation. There was also a cost in terms of increasing inequality in business prospects between places located on the railways and those located at a distance from them.

In northern and eastern India, and sporadically elsewhere, the major navigable rivers were an important means of cargo transportation. River traffic was cheaper than roads, and carried larger volumes per head. But the role of rivers in long-distance trade was more or less confined to the Gangetic plains. The most important traffic here connected Bengal with western and northern India via Mirzapur. Cargo went along the Ganges up to Mirzapur, and then was carried overland partly along the current Bombay-Allahabad railway line down south. This traffic was of great antiquity. It is known to have declined in the nineteenth century in competition with the railways.

India had a long and rich tradition in mercantile marine and ship-building. The advent of the Europeans in Indian Ocean created competition for the Indians in coastal shipping. However, it also stimulated the business of some of the ancient ports like Masulipatnam or Cambay. The final blow to Indian traditional enterprise in large-scale shipping came with the displacement of sailing vessels by steam ships in the early-to-middle nineteenth century. The major ports that carried the bulk of the foreign trade in the colonial period were entirely new sites where railways and modern harbour facilities converged. These were Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Karachi and Rangoon. Each served as an export outlet for the products of a vast hinterland. The two western Indian ports enhanced their trade several folds with the American Civil War (1865) and the opening of the Suez Canal (1869). Thereafter, Calcutta and Bombay also grew to become industrial centres. Modern harbours developed in these ports as their commercial importance increased. The First World War, while upsetting private business through these ports, emphasized their military importance. Bombay, especially, saw a modernization drive in the early interwar period.

## Posts and Telegraph

The foundations for a government postal system were in place before 1858. But it became a widely used utility only in the late nineteenth century. This was led only partly by the opening of post offices in semi-rural areas. Very significantly, it was driven by the demand for the services of the post office. Migration and money orders, for example, were synonymous. One could hardly exist without the other. In safety, cost, and wide reach, nothing comparable to the postal money order existed in pre-British periods for the remittance of individual savings within India.

Already in 1849 the East India Company had decided to construct a telegraph system along with the railways and along the railway lines. The telegraph became an urgent necessity on account of tensions on India's western frontier (the Afghan war) and the eastern frontier (the impending war with Burma). The first line, between Calcutta and Diamond Harbour opened in 1851 and was immediately used to send shipping news from the coasts to Calcutta. The major lines were completed before 1855. The remarkable speed owed to strategic needs and to Lord Dalhousie's personal interest in the scheme.

The telegraph was a private enterprise in England and America and a state enterprise in continental Europe. In India it was state enterprise for military reasons, despite Dalhousie's general aversion to state monopolies. By 1857, the telegraph had proven itself a critical military tool in a number of conflicts, rebellions and wars of annexation that distinguished Dalhousie's reign. No wonder it was seen as a symbol of evil by the mutineers in 1857. With vengeance, they destroyed telegraph establishments wherever they could (and never used it to their advantage). But as they began to retreat, the restored telegraph lines again became powerful tools of combat in the hands of the government troops. With this lesson behind itself, the beginning of Crown rule saw massive expansion of the telegraph system between India and Europe and within the country. From then onward, the economic and private uses of the telegraphs began to overwhelm strategic needs, leading to extremely rapid rise in the utilization of the system (Table 8.7).

Table 8.7  
Selected Statistics of the Posts and Telegraph, 1858-1938
<table><tr><td></td><td>1858</td><td>1891</td><td>1921</td><td>19389</td></tr><tr><td>Number of letters, newspapers, packets, parcels received (millions)</td><td>n.a.</td><td>347</td><td>1422</td><td>1241</td></tr><tr><td>Inland money orders paid (Rs millions)</td><td>n.a.</td><td>164</td><td>789</td><td>808</td></tr><tr><td>Paid telegraphic messages sent (value in Rs millions)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Government</td><td>0.20</td><td>1.45</td><td>2.97</td><td>1.63</td></tr><tr><td>Private</td><td>0.18</td><td>2.70</td><td>17.50</td><td>14.40</td></tr><tr><td>Foreign</td><td>—</td><td>1.54</td><td>5.87</td><td>3.85</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>0.38</td><td>5.69</td><td>26.34</td><td>19.88</td></tr></table>

NoThe elegrah dat  he ast cou eat  . ipnot  
calsBi InCalcv.

## The Social Sector

In a narrow sense, investment in mass education and health has implications for economic growth because education improves the capability and productivity of human beings, and better health facilities directly or indirectly help in bringing down rates of population growth. In a broader sense, education and health define the quality of life, and thus can be seen as measures of economic growth. Mass education and health are in the nature of public goods. That is, once a school or hospital is established, it is available for anyone who may demand its services. Because of this, investment in education and health is likely to remain inadequate if left to the private sector. It demands government investment in free facilities, and legislation opening out access of existing facilities. The British rule introduced both these features in India in the form of government and government-aided schools and health-care. In these institutions, moreover, the contents of education or health care were radically different from what was available from indigenous sources.

## Education

Neither the concept of formal instruction nor organizations to impart it were unknown in pre-colonial India. But typically, literacy was confined to the upper castes, almost exclusively to men, and mainly to certain professions. Data collected in the 1830s revealed that instruction was widespread among the men-folk of the priestly, landed and mercantile castes, but practically unknown among the labouring people and amongst women. Majority was instructed at home. A small number in south India was instructed in temples, some in north India were taught in Persian and Arabic schools. The rest were taught in 'schools' that had no independent existence outside the private dwellings where they were held. The rarity of standardized schools and standard curricula reflects the fact that various castes wanted various kinds of education. Instruction was decentralized. Education was seen neither as a public duty nor as a means to improve human capability.

Generally speaking, the nineteenth century witnessed centralization of the educational infrastructure, and replacement of moralreligious with secular and scientific learning. Government control and government investment played a direct role in shaping the new system. The new system provided better preparation for employment in the modern economy or government administration. The whole informal educational structure steadily crumbled over the next 100 years. It decayed because it could offer no marketable degree, had very little symbolic value, had a small base of patronage, and adopted obsolete media of instruction. In parts of Southeast Asia where Buddhist monasteries organized some form of mass education, colonization did not necessarily imply a steady collapse of the old system. For, the monastic schools were well-organized and powerful cultural symbols. The Indian informal education had none of these qualities.

However, the scale of the new system fell short of requirements, which is why the informal system lingered on. Students as a proportion of total population increased from 1.3 per cent in 1891 to 3.7 per cent in 1931, whereas the proportion of persons of school-going age in total population was about 40 per cent in these dates. Only about a fifth of the students who started school reached secondary levels. The government did not have the money to build a mass education system that could accommodate the 100 million children who had attained school-going age in 1931. Private funding was slow to shed the biases that had long confined education to only a few groups and to the men within these groups.

Given that the supply of formal education was scarce, there was bound to be rationing of what was available. Thus, the schools for secular and scientific learning drew their students from the classes that had been receiving some informal education earlier. Those who had little or no access to education earlier continued to have limited access during the British rule. The social prejudices that once discouraged them from any education at all had begun to weaken, but did not disappear. Thus, female literacy levels hardly changed during the colonial period.

Along with inadequate supply, there was also a problem on the demand side. Those classes of people who were formerly literate eagerly used the new schools and colleges. The formerly illiterate classes were either unable or unwilling to enter these institutions. Among communities and regions, some were clearly more open to education than others. Thus, the average literacy rate among the Parsis was 79 per cent in 1931 (73 among Parsi women), whereas the general literacy rate was only 8.3 (2.3 for women). Among the Jains, the literacy rate was 35 per cent (11 among women). In Burma, which was poorer than most Indian provinces, literacy rate was 37 per cent (17 among women). Clearly, communities differed in their perception and in their opportunities as well. The Burmese case illustrates the tenacity of the monastic schools.

## Health

Mortality rate was high in the region before British rule. It began to come down significantly after 1920 (see Chapter 9 for a detailed discussion). Government initiative in the form of sanitation, medical care, and famine prevention contributed to this decline. The first two initiatives started in the barracks. The stress on sanitary reforms had a great deal to do with the exceptionally high death rates in the army. It was related with the growing sense that communicable diseases like cholera, small-pox, or plague thrived on poor water supply, contaminated food, poor drainage, poor sewage, and crowded living conditions. Army death rates dramatically dropped in the last quarter of the century with the reforms.

The Indian Medical Service (IMS) had begun as early as 1764. It recruited health professionals by means of a competitive examination to which Indians were admitted after 1853. The IMS was at first meant to only look after the troops, but its duties gradually expanded. Government hospitals expanded rapidly from the third quarter of the nineteenth century. Dispensaries also increased in number. At first, mainly the Europeans and Anglo-Indians used these institutions. Indians rarely came to these places for treatment. These were concentrated in the towns. For the upper castes, they carried the image of being impure places. The upper castes also had access to the more effective forms of traditional medicine. When Indians did begin to come to government hospitals, a large proportion at first was from lower castes. Gradually, however, prejudices against government hospitals began to decline. One factor in this change of attitude was the latter's success in surgery.

From the 1860s (after the Royal Commission on Sanitation submitted a report in 1863), sanitary reforms began to touch the lives of civilian population and local governments. Large municipal corporations built hospitals staffed with European health officers. Municipalities paid more attention to pure water supply and proper sewage. Public health offices became effective in dealing with major outbreaks of communicable diseases, of which three were especially virulent, malaria, plague and smallpox. Great epidemics, such as the plague epidemic that raged in India between 1896 and 1920, saw some early and rather drastic implementation of the new ideas on how to decontaminate affected habitats. Until the middle of the interwar period, these measures made little difference to the aggregate death rates. Thereafter a steady decline in death rates began to occur. The exact causes of the decline cannot be clearly identified. Sanitation and medical care had very limited reach but still, these measures did contribute to the reduced occurrence of major epidemics after 1920. The other factor, probably the more important one, behind the decline in death rates was the low frequency and severity of famines in the twentieth century (see also the discussion on mortality rates in Chapter 9).

## Policies Of the Princely States

A comprehensive descriptive history of the economic policies of the states waits to be written. Some works exist on the three largest states,

Hyderabad, Mysore and Travancore. Based on these studies, a few hypotheses can be advanced.

First, the broad composition of public expenditure and revenue in the states conformed with that of British India. The land tax dominated revenue in the nineteenth century. Administration, including police, justice, and palace expenses, took away a large proportion of the expenditure. For example, in Mysore during 1905 and 1910, these heads accounted for over half the public expenditure.

Second, both the structure of revenue and the structure of expenditure were changing in the same direction as British India from the last quarter of the nineteenth century. The importance of the land tax declined and that of commodity taxes and royalties increased. In Mysore, income from excise, forest royalties, state railways, and royalties from the Kolar gold mines increased substantially between 1880 and 1910. Forest income was also crucial in the numerous sub-Himalayan states. In expenditure, infrastructure began to increase its share.

Third, in the nature of infrastructure expenditure, the priorities in the states by and large followed the priorities in British India. Thus, in the late nineteenth century, the main item of expenditure was the railways. Again, in the interwar period many states began to play a more active and diversified role.

Fourth, at this stage the experiences of different states began to diverge. In this divergence, a major role was played by the nature of local politics and by the technocrat- advisers who commanded influence in some of the states. In Mysore, there was great interest and commitment towards industrial development under the initiative of the state. The debates on industrial policy in Mysore anticipated some of the issues that figured in the 1950s discussion on industrial policy for India (this episode in Mysore history was briefly discussed in Chapter 5). Interwar Mysore also saw the implementation of major projects in irrigation. In Travancore and Baroda, the emphasis fell on the social sector, education and health. In all these states, the role of 'outsiders' in policy matters was significant. In Hyderabad, on the other hand, internal ruling classes and business interests had a larger influence on policy. Hyderabad more or less confined itself to industrial development under the leadership of the local landed and trading communities. In this effort, Hyderabad pioneered the concept of state-backed investment banking, which has bcen used extensively by central and state governments in post-independence India.

It is unlikely that these four broad hypotheses will be upset when the history of the states is written out more fully. But, admittedly, this is a very bare and tentative outline of a complex and little-known subject.

## COnclusion

In many respects colonial India had a more modern form of government than most previous Indian regimes. It had a more diversified revenue base. It spent less on luxuries and more on the genuine duties of the state such as defence, welfare, infrastructure and institutions. Yt i noi nificant difference for the average Indian. And the little it spent concentrated in areas that promised the government monetary profit.

The immediate reason behind this poor and biased effort was the government's own poverty. It spent little because it earned little. The extent by which colonial India fell short in its capacity to make a difference can be seen in comparison to UK and Japan (Table 8.8). Even compared to most of its generally impoverished neighbours in South and Southeast Asia, British India was a desperately poor government. In 192030, the government of the Federated Malay States spent, on average, more than ten times the money spent in British India per head. That of Ceylon spent more than three times, those of the Philippines and the Dutch East Indies more than double, and those of Siam (Thailand) and French Indo-China 4050 per cent more. None of these was a significantly richer country than British India. Nor were they formally or informally free from colonialism. And yet their governments could do far more for their people. How?

A closer look at public finance in these countries suggests a much larger usage of flexible sources of revenue such as customs, excise and income tax. This hints at two types of constraints the British Indian government suffered from. One arose externally--the limited use of customs was a result of explicit or implicit lobbying by British trade interests. There was, in this sense, an imperial element in the government's fiscal weakness. To a greater or lesser extent, all the Asian countries mentioned above had to face the pressure of European manufacturers to keep trade open and unrestricted. In India, such lobbying succeeded significantly until the 1920s. The other factor behind the poverty of the Indian government arose internally. The limited use of income tax was partly related to the stout resistance of powerful landlords, the most obviously taxable Indians. On top of these constraints was added the large defence commitment.

TABLE 8.8  
India in Comparison:  
Size of Government and Social Sector in 192030
<table><tr><td></td><td>India</td><td>UK</td><td>Japan</td></tr><tr><td>Size of Government: Government revenue as a ratio of National Income (per cent)</td><td>5.2</td><td>18.8</td><td>29.2</td></tr><tr><td>Size of Government: Government revenue per capita (£)</td><td>&lt;1</td><td>24</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>Health Indicators:</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Death Rate (per &#x27;000 persons) Infant Mortality (per &#x27;000 live births)</td><td>26.0</td><td>12.2</td><td>21.3 153</td></tr><tr><td>Growth of School Education:</td><td>181</td><td>74</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>School-going children as ratio of population (per cent)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Primary Secondary</td><td>2.4</td><td>12.9</td><td>27.0</td></tr><tr><td>Secondary enrolment as a ratio of primary (%)</td><td>0.5 20.8</td><td>9.3 72.1</td><td>6.6 24.4</td></tr></table>

Sources:Statistical Abstracts for British India, Calcutta, various years, and B.R. Mitchell, International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia and Oceania, and Mitchell, International Historical Statistics: Europe 17591988, Macmillan, New York, 1992.

The limited levying of taxes on the wealthy suggests a more general and well-known hypothesis about the nature of British rule in India. A tiny minority of Europeans ruled over an immensely large and diverse territory populated by a vast number who had proved their potential for violent rebellion at the time of the mutiny. The situation was not favourable for large and daring reforms that might affect and anger the local elite. The general approach to taxation, therefore, was orthodox and risk-averse. In effect, the internal taxation system was regressive. Public finance, as nearly all other aspects of governance, carried an implicit bias for preserving hierarchies among Indians. Imperialism was not alone in paralyzing the government. The local distribution of power, which the British were not easily persuaded to upset, mattered just as strongly.

The sense of inertia that colonialism was powerless to change returns in the discussion on population growth, which is the subject of the next chapter. The inertia can be seen in indices of social development that were correlated with decline in birth rates.

## Annotated Readings

## Policies and Policy-making

The institutional structure of decision-making has been described in S. Ambirajan, Classical Political Economy and British Policy in India, Cambridge, 1978, Ch.1. See also the Table 3, p. 269, for an overview of government intervention.

## Trade and Public Finance

Free trade and protection in colonial India are well-researched themes. See Ambirajan, Classical Political Economy, Ch. 2. A substantial recent study is Basudeb Chatterji, Trade, Tariffs and Empire, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1992. See also some of the earlier and shorter studies, especially, Clive Dewey, 'The End of the Imperialism of Free Trade: The Eclipse of the Lancashire Lobby and the Concession of Fiscal Autonomy to India', in Dewey and A.G. Hopkins (eds), The Imperial Impact: Studies in the Economic Development of Africa and India, London, 1978. On the impact of tariffs on Indian industry, see discussion in Ch. 5 and the readings cited therein.

On public finance, Dharma Kumar, '"The Fiscal System', in CEHI 2. The essay touches on all aspects of Indian public finance and the debates around it. Those who wish to read more on specific aspects of taxation and expenditure policy, can follow the readings list given in Kumar. See also the sources in Ch. 7, and especially M.J.K. Thavaraj, 'Capital Formation in the Public Sector in India: A Historical Study, 18981938', in V.K.R.V. Rao (ed.), Papers on National Income and Allied Topics, Allied Publishers, Bombay, 1962.

## Infrastructure and Institutions

On irrigation, Elizabeth Whitcombe, 'Irrigation', in CEHI 2; and Ian Stone, Canal Irrigation in British India, Cambridge, 1984, Ch. 1 (on the controversy), Ch. 2 (on construction of the canals), and Ch. 8 (on the effects of canals upon standards of living and the regional economy).

On the construction, financing, administration, technology and employment practices in the railways, read Daniel Thorner, Investment in Empire: British Railvay and Steam Shipping Enterprise in India 18251849, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1950; I.J. Kerr, Building the Railrvays of the Raj 1850-1900, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1995; Peter Harnetty, Imperialism and Free Trade: Lancashire and India in the Mid-nineteenth Century, University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver, 1972, Ch. 4; Ian Derbyshire, The Building of India's Railways: The Application of Western Technology in the Colonial periphery 1850—1920', in Roy MacLeod and Deepak Kumar (eds), Technology and the Raj: Western Technology and Technical Transfers to India, 1700-1947, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1995. On the economic effects of the railways, John Hurd, 'Railways', in CEHI 2. Several works cited in Ch. 3 also deal with this theme. For a superbly readable and illustrated descriptive history of the railways, read Chs I-V of Indian Railvays: One Hundred Years 18531953, Railway Board, New Delhi, 1953 (written by J.N. Sahni).

On the telegraph, see Saroj Ghose, 'The Introduction and Development of the Electric Telegraph in India', PhD dissertation, Jadavpur University, Calcutta, 1974. This work is not easily accessible. The following essay by Ghose describes the early history of the telegraph in sufficient detail, 'Commercial Needs and Military Necessities: The Telegraph in India', in Roy MacLeod and Deepak Kumar (eds), Technology and the Raj: Western Technology and Technical Transfers to India, 17001947, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1995.

On education, see Syed Nurullah and J.P. Naik, A History of Education in India, Bombay, 1951, for a detailed descriptive study. On scientific and technical education, a subject not covered in this chapter, see Deepak Kumar, Science and the Raj, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1995, Ch. 4. On the development of health care in colonial India, see David Arnold, Colonizing the Body-State Medicine and Epidemic Disease in Nineteenth-Century India, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1993, Ch. 6; Arun Kumar, Medicine and the Raj, British Medical Policy in India, 18351911, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1998. The last thirty years of British rule continue to be inadequately researched. There are, however, works on specific aspects. For example, V.R. Muraleedharan, 'Development of Preventive Health Care in the Madras Presidency: The Case of Malaria during the Interwar Years', in S. Bhattacharya et al (eds), The South Indian Economy, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1991.

## Princely States

As mentioned in the text, only economic policies of the three larger states have been researched. See Bjorn Hettne, The Political Economy of Indirect Rule: Mysore 1881-1947, Curzon Press, London and Malmo, 1978, Part II; T.M. Thomas Isaac and P.K. Michael Tharakan, 'An Enquiry into the Historical Roots of Industrial Backwardness of Kerala—A Study of the Travancore Region', Centre for Development Studies, Trivandrum, Working Paper No. 215; Raman Mahadevan,

Industrial Entrepreneurship in Princely Travancore: 1930-47' and C.V. Subbarao, Role of the State in Industrialization: The Case of Hydabr Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1991.
