> 来源：Age of Revolution 1789-1848 (Eric Hobsbawm [Hobsbawm, Eric])
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Age of Revolution 1789-1848 (Eric Hobsbawm [Hobsbawm, Eric])\Age of Revolution 1789-1848 (Eric Hobsbawm [Hobsbawm, Eric]).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# CHAPTER 9

# TOWARDS AN INDUSTRIAL WORLD

These are indeed glorious times for the Engineers. James Nasmyth, inventor of the steam-hammer1 Devant de tels témoins, o secle progressive, Vantez-nous le pouvoir de la locomotive, Vantez-nous le vapeur et les chemins de fer. A. Pommier2

## I

ONLY one economy was effectively industrialized by 1848, the British, and consequently dominated the world. Probably by the 1840s the USA and a good part of Western and Central Europe had stepped across, or were on, the threshold of industrial revolution. It was already reasonably certain that the USA would eventually be considered—within twenty years, thought Richard Cobden in the middle $1 8 3 0 s ^ { 3 } - a$ serious competitor to the British, and by the 1840s Germans, though perhaps no one else, already pointed to the rapid industrial advance of their countrymen. But prospects are not achievements, and by the 1840s the actual industrial transformations of the non-English-speaking world were still modest. There were, for instance, by 1850 a total of little more than a hundred miles of railway line in the whole of Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia, Switzerland and the entire Balkan

peninsula, and (omitting the USA) less than this in all the non-European continents put together. If we omit Britain and a few patches elsewhere, the economic and social world of the 1840s can easily be made to look not so very different from that of 1788. Most of the population of the world, then as earlier, were peasants. In 1830 there was, after all, still only one western city of more than a million inhabitants (London), one of more than half a million (Paris) and—omitting Britain—only nineteen European cities of more than a hundred thousand.

This slowness of change in the non-British world meant that its economic movements continued, until the end of our period, to be controlled by the age-old-rhythm of good and bad harvests rather than by the new one of alternating industrial booms and slumps. The crisis of 1857 was probably the first that was both world-wide and caused by events other than agrarian catastrophe. This fact, incidentally, had the most far-reaching political consequences. The rhythm of change in industrial and nonindustrial areas diverged between 1780 and 1848i.

The economic crisis which set fire to so much of Europe in 1846-8 was an old-style agrarian-dominated depression. It was in a sense the last, and perhaps worst, economic breakdown of the ancien régime in economics. Not so in Britain, where the worst breakdown of the period of early industrialism occurred between 1839 and 1842 for purely ‘modern’ reasons, and indeed coincided with fairly low corn-prices. The point of spontaneous social combustion in Britain was reached in the unplanned Chartist general strike of the summer of 1842 (the so-called ‘plug riots’). By the time it was reached on the continent in 1848, Britain was merely suffering the first cyclical depression of the long era of Victorian expansion, as also was Belgium, the other more or less industrial economy of Europe. A continental revolution without a corresponding British movement, as Marx foresaw, was doomed. What he did not foresee was that the unevenness of British and Continental development made it inevitable that the continent should rise alone.

Nevertheless, what counts about the period from 1789 to 1848 is not that by later standards its economic changes were small, but that fundamental changes were plainly taking place. The first of these was demographic. World population—and especially the population of the world within the orbit of the dual revolution—had begun that unprecedented ‘explosion’ which has in the course of 150 years or so multiplied its numbers. Since few countries before the nineteenth century kept anything corresponding to censuses, and these in general far from reliable,ii we do not know accurately how rapidly population rose in this period; it was certainly unparalleled, and greatest (except perhaps in underpopulated countries filling empty and hitherto underutilized spaces such as Russia) in the economically most advanced areas. The population of the USA (swollen by immigration, encouraged by the unlimited spaces and resources of a continent) increased almost six times over from 1790 to 1850, from four to twenty-three millions. The population of the United Kingdom almost doubled between 1800 and 1850, almost trebled between 1750 and 1850. The population of Prussia (1846 boundaries) almost doubled from 1800 to 1846, as did that of European Russia (without Finland). The populations of Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Holland, and large parts of Italy almost doubled between 1750 and 1850, but increased at a less extraordinary rate during our period; that of Spain and Portugal increased by a third.

Outside Europe we are less well-informed, though it would seem that the population of China increased at a rapid rate in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century, until European intervention and the traditional cyclical movement of Chinese political history produced the breakdown of the flourishing administration of the Manchu dynasty, which was at the peak of its effectiveness in this period.iii In Latin America it probably increased at a rate comparable to Spain’s.4 There is no sign of any population explosion in other parts of Asia. Africa’s population probably remained stable. Only certain empty spaces populated by white settlers increased at a really extraordinary rate, like Australia which in 1790 had virtually no white inhabitants but by 1851 had a half-million.

This remarkable increase in population naturally stimulated the economy immensely, though we ought to regard it as a consequence rather than as exogenous cause of the economic revolution; for without it so rapid a population growth could not have been maintained for more than a limited period. (Indeed, in Ireland, where it was not supplemented by constant economic revolution, it was not maintained.) It produced more labour, above all more young labour and more consumers. The world or our period was a far younger world than any previous one: filled with children, and with young couples or people in the prime of their lives.

The second major change was in communications. Railways were admittedly only in their infancy in 1848, though already of considerable practical importance in Britain, the USA, Belgium, France and Germany, but even before their introduction the improvement was, by former standards, breathtaking. The Austrian empire, for instance (omitting Hungary) added over 30,000 miles of road between 1830 and 1847, thus multiplying its highway mileage by two-and-a-third.5 Belgium almost doubled its road network between 1830 and 1850, and even Spain, thanks largely to French occupation, almost doubled its tiny highway length. The USA, as usual more gigantic in its enterprises than any other country, multiplied its network of mail-coach roads more than eight times—from 21,000 miles in 1800 to 170,000 in 1850.6 While Britain acquired her system of canals, France built 2,000 miles of them (1800–47), and the USA opened such crucial waterways as the Erie and the Chesapeake and Ohio. The total shipping tonnage of the western world more than doubled between 1800 and the early 1840s, and already steamships linked Britain and France (1822) and plied up and down the Danube. (There were in 1840 about 370,000 tons of steam shipping compared to nine million of sail, though in fact this may have already represented about one sixth of carrying capacity.) Here again the Americans outdid the rest of the world, racing even the British for the possession of the largest merchant fleet.iv

Nor would we underestimate the sheer improvement in speed and carrying capacity thus achieved. No doubt the coach-service which drove the Tsar of all the Russias from St Petersburg to Berlin in four days (1834) was not available to lesser humans; but the new rapid mail (copied from the French and English), which after 1824 drove from Berlin to Magdeburg in fifteen hours instead of two and half days, was. The railway and Rowland Hill’s brilliant invention of the standardized charge for postal matter in 1839 (supplemented by the invention of the adhesive stamp in 1841) multiplied the mails; but even before both, and in countries less advanced than Britain, it increased rapidly: between 1830 and 1840 the number of letters annually sent in France rose from 64 to 94 millions. Sailing ships were not merely faster and more reliable: they were on average also bigger.7

Technically, no doubt, these improvements were not as deeply inspiring as the railways, though the ravishing bridges, curving freshly across the rivers, the great artificial waterways and docks, the splendid clipper-ships gliding like swans in full sail, and the elegant new mailcoaches were and remain some of the most beautiful products of industrial design. But as means of facilitating travel and transport, of linking town and country, poor and rich regions, they were admirably effective. The growth of population owed much to them; for what in pre-industrial times holds it back is not so much the high normal mortality of men, but the periodic catastrophes of—often very localized—famine and food shortage. If famine became less menacing in the western world in this period (except in years of almost universal harvest failure such as 1816-7 and 1846-8), it was primarily because of such improvements in transport, as well as, of course, the general improvement in the efficiency of government and administration (cf chapter 10).

The third major change was, naturally enough, in the sheer bulk of commerce and migration. No doubt not everywhere. There is, for instance, no sign that Calabrian or Apulian peasants were yet prepared to migrate, nor that the amount of goods annually brought to the great fair of Nijniy Novgorod increased to any startling extent.8 But taking the world of the dual revolution as a whole, the movement of men and goods already had the momentum of a landslide. Between 1816 and 1850 something like five million Europeans left their native countries (almost four-fifths of them for the Americas), and within countries the currents of internal migration were far vaster. Between 1780 and 1840 the total international trade of the western world more than trebled; between 1780 and 1850 it multiplied more than fourfold. By later standards all this was no doubt very modest,v but by earlier ones—and these after all were what contemporaries compared their age with—they were beyond the wildest dreams.

What was more to the point, after about 1830—the turning-point which the historian of our period cannot miss, whatever his particular field of interest the rate of economic and social change accelerated visibly and rapidly. Outside Britain the period of the French Revolution and its wars brought relatively little immediate advance, except in the USA which leaped ahead after its own war of independence, doubling its cultivated area by 1810, multiplying its shipping sevenfold, and in general demonstrating its future capacities. (Not only the cotton-gin, but the steam-ship, the early development of assembly-line production—Oliver Evans’ flour-mill on a conveyor-belt—are American advances of this period.) The foundations of a good deal of later industry, especially heavy industry, were laid in Napoleonic Europe, but not much survived the end of the wars, which brought crisis everywhere. On the whole the period from 1815 to 1830 was one of setbacks, or at the best of slow recovery. States put their finances in order—normally by rigorous deflation (the Russians were the last to do so in 1841). Industries tottered under the blows of crisis and foreign competition; the American cotton industry was very badly hit. Urbanization was slow: until 1828 the French rural population grew as fast as that of the cities. Agriculture languished, especially in Germany. Nobody observing the economic growth of this period, even outside the formidably expanding British economy, would be inclined to pessimism; but few would judge that any country other than Britain and perhaps the USA was on the immediate threshold of industrial revolution. To take an obvious index of the new industry: outside Britain, the USA and France the number of steam engines and the amount of steam power in the rest of the world in the 1820s was scarcely worth the attention of the statistician.

After 1830 (or thereabouts) the situation changed swiftly and drastically; so much so that by 1840 the characteristic social problems of industrialism—the new proletariat, the horrors of uncontrolled breakneck urbanization—were the commonplace of serious discussion in Western Europe and the nightmare of the politician and administrator. The number of steam engines in Belgium doubled, their horsepower almost trebled, between 1830 and 1838: from 354 (with 11,000 hp) to 712 (with 30,000). By 1850 the small, but by now very heavily industrialized, country had almost 2,300 engines of 66,000 horse-power,9 and almost 6 million tons of coal production (nearly three times as much as in 1830). In 1830 there had been no joint-stock companies in Belgian mining; by 1841 almost half the coal output came from such companies.

It would be monotonous to quote analogous data for France, for German states, Austria or any other countries and areas in which the foundations of modern industry were laid in these twenty years: Krupps of Germany, for instance, installed their first steam engine in 1835, the first shafts of the great Ruhr coalfield were sunk in 1837, and the first coke-fired furnace was set up in the great Czech iron centre of Vítkovice in 1836, Falck’s first rolling-mill in Lombardy in 1839-40. All the more monotonous as—with the exception of Belgium, and perhaps France—the period of really massive industrialization did not occur until after 1848. 1830-48 marks the birth of industrial areas, of famous industrial centres and firms whose names have become familiar from that day to this; but hardly even their adolescence, let alone their maturity. Looking back on the 1830s we know what that atmosphere of excited technical experiment, of discontented and innovating enterprise meant. It meant the opening of the American Middle West; but Cyrus McCormick’s first mechanical reaper (1834) and the first 78 bushels of wheat sent eastwards from Chicago in 1838 only take their place in history because of what they led to after 1850. In 1846 the factory which risked manufacturing a hundred reapers was still to be congratulated on its daring: ‘it was difficult indeed to find parties with sufficient boldness or pluck and energy, to undertake the hazardous enterprise of building reapers, and quite as difficult to prevail upon farmers to take their chances of cutting their grain with them, or to look favourably upon such innovation.’10 It meant the systematic building of the railways and heavy industries of Europe, and incidentally, a revolution in the techniques of investment; but if the brothers Pereire had not become the great adventurers of industrial finance after 1851, we should pay little attention to the project of ‘a lending and borrowing office where industry will borrow from all capitalists on the most favourable terms through the intermediary of the richest bankers acting as guarantors’, which they vainly submitted to the new French government in 1830.11

As in Britain, consumer goods—generally textiles, but also sometimes foodstuffs—led these bursts of industrialization; but capital goods—iron, steel, coal, etc.—were already more important than in the first British industrial revolution: in 1846 17 per cent of Belgian industrial employment was in capital goods industries as against between 8 and 9 per cent in Britain. By 1850 three-quarters of all Belgian industrial steam-power was in mining and metallurgy.12 As in Britain, the average new industrial establishment—factory, forge or mine—was rather small, surrounded by a great undergrowth of cheap, technically unrevolutionized domestic, puttingout or sub-contracted labour, which grew with the demands of the factories and the market and would eventually be destroyed by the further advances of both. In Belgium (1846) the average number in a woollen, linen and cotton factory establishment were a mere 30, 35 and 43 workers, in Sweden (1838) the average per textile ‘factory’ was a mere 6 to $7 . { \overset { 1 3 } { - } }$ On the other hand there are signs of rather heavier concentration than in Britain, as indeed one might expect where industry developed later, sometimes as an enclave in agrarian environments, using the experience of the earlier pioneers, based on a more highly developed technology, and often enjoying greater planned support from governments. In Bohemia (1841) threequarters of all cotton-spinners were employed in mills with over 100 workers each, and almost half in fifteen mills with over 200 each.14 (On the other hand virtually all weaving until the 1850s was done on handlooms.) This was naturally even more so in the heavy industries which now came to the fore: the average Belgian foundry (1838) had 80 workers, the average Belgian coal-mine (1846) something like $1 5 0 ; ^ { 1 5 }$ not to mention the industrial giants like Cockerill’s of Seraing, which employed 2,000.

The industrial landscape was thus rather like a series of lakes studded with islands. If we take the country in general as the lake, the islands represent industrial cities, rural complexes (such as the networks of manufacturing villages so common in the central German and Bohemian mountains) or industrial areas: textile towns like Mulhouse, Lille or Rouen in France, Elberfeld-Barmen (the home of Frederick Engels’ pious cottonmaster family) or Krefeld in Prussia, southern Belgium or Saxony. If we take the broad mass of independent artisans, peasants turning out goods for sale in the winter season, and domestic or putting-out workers as the lake, the islands represent the mills, factories, mines and foundries of various sizes. The bulk of the landscape was still very much water; or—to adapt the metaphor a little more closely to reality—the reed-beds of small scale or dependent production which formed round the industrial and commercial centres. Domestic and other industries founded earlier as appendages of feudalism, also existed. Most of these—e.g. the Silesian linen-industry— were in rapid and tragic decline.16 The great cities were hardly industrialized at all, though they maintained a vast population of labourers and craftsmen to serve the needs of consumption, transport and general services. Of the world’s towns with over 100,000 inhabitants, apart from Lyon, only the British and American ones included obviously industrial centres: Milan, for instance, in 1841 had a mere two small steam engines. In fact the typical industrial centre—in Britain as well as on the continent— was a small or medium-sized provincial town or a complex of villages.

In one important respect, however, continental—and also to some extent American—industrialization, differed from the British. The preconditions for its spontaneous development by private enterprise were far less favourable. As we have seen, in Britain there was, after some 200 years of slow preparation, no real shortage of any of the factors of production and no really crippling institutional obstacle to full capitalist development. Elsewhere this was not so. In Germany, for instance, there was a distinct capital shortage; the very modesty of the standard of life among the German middle classes (beautifully transformed though it was into the charming austerities of Biedermayer interior decoration) demonstrates it. It is often forgotten that by contemporary Germany standards Goethe, whose house in Weimar corresponds to rather more—but not much more—than the standard of comfort of the modest bankers of the British Clapham sect, was a very wealthy man indeed. In the 1820s Court ladies and even princesses in Berlin wore simple percale dresses throughout the year; if they owned a silk dress, they saved it for special occasions.17 The traditional gild system of master, journeyman and apprentice, still stood in the way of business enterprise, of the mobility of skilled labour, and indeed of all economic change: the obligation for a craftsman to belong to a gild was abolished in Prussia in 1811, though not the gilds themselves, whose members were, moreover, politically strengthened by the municipal legislation of the period. Guild production remained almost intact until the

1830s and 40s. Elsewhere the full introduction of Gewerbefreiheit had to wait until the 1850s.

A multiplicity of petty states, each with their controls and vested interests, still inhibited rational development. Merely to construct a general customs union (excluding Austria), as Prussia succeeded in doing in its own interest and by the pressure of its strategic position between 1818 and 1834, was a triumph. Each government, mercantilist and paternal, showered its regulations and administrative supervisions on the humble subject; to the benefit of social stability, but to the irritation of the private entrepreneur. The Prussian State controlled the quality and fair price of handicraft production, the activities of the Silesian domestic linen-weaving industry, and the operations of mine-owners on the right bank of the Rhine. Government permission was required before a man could open a mine, and could be withdrawn after he was in business.

Clearly under such circumstances (which can be paralleled in numerous other states), industrial development had to operate rather differently from the British way. Thus throughout the continent government took a much greater hand in it, not merely because it was already accustomed to, but because it had to. William I, King of the United Netherlands, in 1822 founded the Société Générale pour favoriser l’Industrie Nationale des Pays Bas, endowed with State land, with 40 per cent or so of its shares subscribed by the King and 5 per cent guaranteed to all other subscribers. The Prussian State continued to operate a large proportion of the country’s mines. Without exception the new railway systems were planned by Governments and, if not actually built by them, encouraged by the grant of favourable concessions and the guarantee of investments. Indeed, to this day Britain is the only country whose railway system was built entirely by risk-bearing and profit-making private enterprise, unencouraged by bonuses and guarantees to investors and entrepreneurs. The earliest and best-planned of these networks was the Belgian, projected in the early’thirties, in order to detach the newly independent country from the (primarily waterborne) communication system based on Holland. Political difficulties and the reluctance of the conservative grande bourgeoisie to exchange safe for speculative investments postponed the systematic construction of the French network, which the Chamber had decided on in 1833; poverty of resources that of the Austrian, which the State decided to build in 1842, and the Prussian plans.

For similar reasons continental enterprise depended far more than the British on an adequately modernized business, commercial and banking legislation and financial apparatus. The French Revolution in fact provided both: Napoleon’s legal codes, with their stress of legally guaranteed freedom of contract, their recognition of bills of exchange and other commerical paper, and their arrangements for joint-stock enterprise (such as the société anonyme and the commandite, adopted all over Europe except in Britain and Scandinavia) became the general model for the world for this reason. Moreover, the devices for financing industry which sprang from the fertile brain of those revolutionary young Saint-Simonians, the brothers Pereire, were welcomed abroad. Their greatest triumph had to await the world boom era of the 1850s; but already in the 1830s the Belgian Société Générale began to practise investment banking of the kind the Pereires envisaged and financiers in Holland (though not yet listened to by the bulk of businessmen) adopted the Saint-Simonian ideas. In essence these ideas aimed at mobilizing a variety of domestic capital resources which would not spontaneously have gone into industrial development, and whose owners would not have known where to invest them had they wanted to, through banks and investment trusts. After 1850 it produced the characteristic continental (especially German) phenomenon of the large bank acting as investor as much as banker, and thereby dominating industry and facilitating its early concentration.

## III

However, the economic development of this period contains one gigantic paradox: France. On paper no country should have advanced more rapidly. It possessed, as we have seen, institutions ideally suited to capitalist development. The ingenuity and inventiveness of its entrepreneurs was without parallel in Europe. Frenchmen invented or first developed the department store, advertising, and, guided by the supremacy of French science, all manner of technical innovations and achievements— photography (with Nicephore Nièpce and Daguerre), the Leblanc soda process, the Berthollet chlorine bleach, electroplating, galvanization. French financiers were the most inventive of the world. The country possessed large capital reserves which it exported, aided by its technical expertise, all over the continent—and even, after 1850, with such things as the London General Omnibus Company, to Britain. By 1847 about 2,250 million francs had gone abroad18— a quantity second only to the British and astronomically bigger than any one else’s. Paris was a centre of international finance lagging only a little behind London; indeed, in times of crisis such as 1847, stronger. French enterprise in the 1840s founded the gas companies of Europe—in Florence, Venice, Padua, Verona—and obtained charters to found them all over Spain, Algeria, Cairo and Alexandria. French enterprise was about to finance the railways of the European continent (except those of Germany and Scandinavia).

Yet in fact French economic development at the base was distinctly slower than that of other countries. Her population grew quietly, but it did not leap upwards. Her cities (with the exception of Paris) expanded only modestly; indeed in the early 1830s some contracted. Her industrial power in the late 1840s was no doubt larger than that of all other continental European countries—she possessed as much steam-power as the rest of the continent put together—but she had lost ground relatively to Britain and was about to lose it relatively to Germany. Indeed, in spite of her advantages and early start, France never became a major industrial power comparable to Britain, Germany and the USA.

The explanation of this paradox is, as we have seen (see above pp. 69– 70), the French Revolution itself, which took away with the hand of Robespierre much of what it gave with the hand of the Constituent Assembly. The capitalist part of the French economy was a superstructure erected on the immovable base of the peasantry and petty-bourgeoisie. The landless free labourers merely trickled into the cities; the standardized cheap goods which made the fortunes of the progressive industrialist elsewhere lacked a sufficiently large and expanding market. Plenty of capital was saved, but why should it be invested in home industy?19 The wise French entrepreneur made luxury goods and not goods for mass consumption; the wise financier promoted foreign rather than home industries. Private enterprise and economic growth go together only when the latter provides higher profits for the former than other forms of business. In France it did not, though through France it fertilized the economic growth of other countries.

At the opposite extreme from France stood the USA. The country suffered from a shortage of capital, but it was ready to import it in any quantities, and Britain stood ready to export it. It suffered from an acute shortage of manpower, but the British Isles and Germany exported their surplus population, after the great hunger of the middle forties, in millions. It lacked sufficient men of technical skill; but even these—Lancashire cotton workers, Welsh miners and iron-men—could be imported from the already industrialized sector of the world, and the characteristic American knack of inventing labour-saving and above all labour-simplifying machinery was already fully deployed. The USA lacked merely settlement and transport to open up its apparently endless territories and resources. The mere process of internal expansion was enough to keep its economy in almost unlimited growth, though American settlers, Governments, missionaries and traders already expanded overland to the Pacific or pushed their trade—backed by the most dynamic and second largest merchant fleet of the world—across the oceans, from Zanzibar to Hawaii. Already the Pacific and the Carribbean were the chosen fields of American empire.

Every institution of the new republic encouraged accumulation, ingenuity and private enterprise. A vast new population, settled in the seaboard cities and the newly occupied inland states, demanded the same standardized personal, household and farm goods and equipment and provided an ideally homogeneous market. The rewards of invention and enterprise were ample: and the inventors of the steamship (1807–13), the humble tack (1807), the screw-cutting machine (1809), the artificial denture (1822), insulated wire (1827–31), the revolver (1835), the idea of the typewriter and sewing machine (1843–6) the rotary printing press (1846) and a host of pieces of farm machinery pursued them. No economy expanded more rapidly in this period than the American, even though its really headlong rush was only to occur after 1860.

Only one major obstacle stood in the way of the conversion of the USA into the world economic power which it was soon to become: the conflict between an industrial and farming north and a semi-colonial south.

For while the North benefited from the capital, labour and skills of Europe and notably Britain—as an independent economy, the South (which imported few of these resources) was a typical dependent economy of Britain. Its very success in supplying the booming factories of Lancashire with almost all their cotton perpetuated its dependence, comparable to that which Australia was about to develop on wool, the Argentine on meat. The South was for free trade, which enabled it to sell to Britain and in return to buy cheap British goods; the North, almost from the beginning (1816), protected the home industrialist heavily against any foreigner—i.e. the British—who would then have undersold him. North and South competed for the territories of the West—the one for slave plantations and backward self-sufficient hill squatters, the other for mechanical reapers and mass slaughterhouses; and until the age of the trans-continental railroad the South, which controlled the Mississippi delta through which the Middle West found its chief outlet, held some strong economic cards. Not until the Civil War of 1861–5—which was in effect the unification of America by and under Northern capitalism—was the future of the American economy settled.

The other future giant of the world economy, Russia, was as yet economically negligible, though forward-looking observers already predicted that its vast size, population and resources must sooner or later come into their own. The mines and manufactures created by eighteenthcentury Tsars with landlords or feudal merchants as employers, serfs as labourers, were slowly declining. The new industries—domestic and smallscale textile works—only began a really noticeable expansion in the 1860s. Even the export of corn to the west from the fertile black earth belt of the Ukraine made only moderate progress. Russian Poland was rather more advanced, but, like the rest of Eastern Europe, from Scandinavia in the north to the Balkan peninsula in the south, the age of major economic transformation was not yet at hand. Nor was it in Southern Italy and Spain, except for small patches of Catalonia and the Basque country. And even in Northern Italy, where economic changes were very much larger, they were far more obvious as yet in agriculture (always, in this region, a major outlet for capital investment and business enterprise) and in trade and shipping than in manufactures. But the development of these was handicapped all over Southern Europe by the acute shortage of what was then still the only important source of industrial power, coal.

One part of the world thus swept forward towards industrial power; another lagged. But the two phenomena are not unconnected with each other. Economic stagnation, sluggishness, or even regression was the product of economic advance. For how could the relatively backward economies resist the force—or in certain instances the attraction—of the new centres of wealth, industry and commerce? The English and certain other European areas could plainly undersell all competitors. To be the workshop of the world suited them. Nothing seemed more ‘natural’ than that the less advanced should produce food and perhaps minerals, exchanging these non-competitive goods for British (or other West-European) manufactures. ‘The sun,’ Richard Cobden told the Italians ‘is your coal’.20 Where local power was in the hands of large landowners or even progressive farmers or ranchers, the exchange suited both sides. Cuban plantation owners were quite happy to make their money by sugar, and to import the foreign goods which allowed the foreigners to buy sugar. Where local manufacturers could make their voice heard, or local governments appreciated the advantages of balanced economic development or merely the disadvantages of dependence, the disposition was less sunny. Frederick List, the German economist—as usual wearing the congenial costume of philosophic abstraction—rejected an international economy which in effect made Britain the chief or only industrial power and demanded protectionism; and so, as we have seen—minus the philosophy—did the Americans.

All this assumed that an economy was politically independent and strong enough to accept or reject the role for which the pioneer industrialization of one small sector of the world had cast it. Where it was not independent, as in colonies, it had no choice. India, as we have seen, was in the process of de-industrialization, Egypt provided an even more vivid illustration of the process. For there the local ruler, Mohammed Ali, had in fact systematically set out to turn his country into a modern, i.e. among other things an industrial, economy. Not only did he encourage the growing of cotton for the world market (from 1821), but by 1838 he had invested the very considerable sum of £12 millions in industry, which employed perhaps thirty to forty thousand workers. What would have happened had Egypt been left to herself, we do not know. For what did happen was that the Anglo-Turkish Convention of 1838 forced foreign traders on to the country, thus undermining the foreign trade monopoly through which Mohammed Ali had operated; and the defeat of Egypt by the West in 1839–41 forced him to reduce his army, and therefore removed most of the incentive which had led him to industrialize.21 Not for the first or last time in the nineteenth century the gunboats of the west ‘opened’ a country to trade, i.e. to the superior competition of the industrialized sector of the world. Who, looking at Egypt in the time of the British protectorate at the end of the century, would have recognized the country which had, fifty years earlier—and to the disgust of Richard Cobdenvi—been the first non-white state to seek the modern way out of economic backwardness?

Of all the economic consequences of the age of dual revolution this division between the ‘advanced’ and the ‘underdeveloped’ countries proved to be the most profound and the most lasting. Roughly speaking by 1848 it was clear which countries were to belong to the first group, i.e. Western Europe (minus the Iberian peninsula), Germany, Northern Italy and parts of central Europe, Scandinavia, the USA and perhaps the colonies settled by English-speaking migrants. But it was equally clear that the rest of the world was, apart from small patches, lagging, or turning—under the informal pressure of western exports and imports or the military pressure of western gunboats and military, expeditions—into economic dependencies of the west. Until the Russians in the 1930s developed means of leaping this chasm between the ‘backward’ and the ‘advanced’, it would remain immovable, untraversed, and indeed growing wider, between the minority and the majority of the world’s inhabitants. No fact has determined the history of the twentieth century more firmly than this.

i The world triumph of the industrial sector once more tended to make it converge, though in a different manner.

ii The first British census was that of 1801; the first reasonably adequate one, that of 1831.

iii The usual dynastic cycle in China lasted about 300 years; the Manchu came to power in the mid seventeenth century.

iv They almost achieved their object by 1860, before the iron ship once again gave the British supremacy.

v Thus between 1850 and 1888 twenty-two million Europeans emigrated, and in 1889 total international trade amounted to nearly £3,400 million compared to less than £600 million in 1840.

vi ‘All this waste is going on with the best raw cotton, which ought to be sold to us…. This is not all the mischief, for the very hands that are driven into such manufactures are torn from the cultivation of the soil.’ Morley, Life of Cobden, Chapter 3.
