> 来源：No place of grace antimodernism and the transformation of American culture, 1880-1920 (Lears, T. J. Jackson, 1947-)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\No place of grace antimodernism and the transformation of American culture, 1880-1920 (Lears, T. J. Jackson, 1947-)\No place of grace antimodernism and the transformation of American culture, 1880-1920 (Lears, T. J. Jackson, 1947-).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Antimodern Quest: From Niagara to the Virgin

The first evidence of Adams's developing religious concern was Esther. Published a year before Marian's death (under a revealingly feminine pseudonym), the novel satirizes the secularization of mainstream Protestantism and tentatively explores Oriental and medieval alternatives. It opens with a wry description of the fashionably dressed, complacent congregation at St. John's Episcopal Church, New York (modelled on Trinity Church, Boston). There was, Adams's characters agree, "a terribly grotesque air of the theater" about the place. "It is a theater," complains the artist Wharton, who has been commissioned to paint the church murals. "That is what ails our religion. But it is not the fault of our art. . . ."22 To Adams, the embellishment of Protestant churches signified an empty theatricality, devoid of genuine belief. The book's major characters stand apart from the fashionable aestheticism of St. John's parishioners; they pray in a different spirit.

The novel's thin plot is a scaffolding for discussion of religious issues. The Reverend Stephen Hazard, first pastor of St. John's, falls in love with the freethinking Esther Dudley. After her father's death, when she longs for religious consolation, Esther accepts Hazard's marriage proposal. She soon regrets it, realizing that she can share neither his faith nor his devotion to the "stupid crowd of people" in the church. Hazard enlists the aid of his friend, the geologist George Strong—an uncertain ally because he is an agnostic. Despite Strong's efforts, Esther cancels the engagement. Spirited off to Buffalo by an aunt, she finds temporary refuge in contemplating the falls at Niagara, then rejects Hazard once more. Strong, impressed by her firm will, proposes marriage. Esther's reply concludes the book "But George, I don't love you, I love him." The inconclusive conclusion reflected Adams's own unresolved conflict between belief and doubt.

Through his major characters, Adams explored alternatives to mainnaliyHazarnlk rivu ock  u with thirteenth century ideas"; he believes in free will and personal immoraly  y ub  "It  atte will!In of Hazard's dogmatism, Adams admires his intellectual fiber. "Like most vigorous-minded men, seeing that there was no stopping place between dogma and negation, he preferred to accept dogma. Of all weaknesses he most disliked timid and half-hearted faith. He would rather have jumped at once to Strong's pure denial, than yield an inch to the argument that a mystery was to be paltered with because it could not be expi ."24 of the Spencerian Unknowable.

While Hazard and Esther are theologically at odds, they share a mystical sensibility. After Esther's father dies, Hazard's comforting words promise the ultimate dissolution of selfhood and its earthly ties in an infinite realm of Being. But his theology, particularly its domesticated heaven where loved ones reunite, seems "all personal and selfish" to Esther. With its High Church rituals, St. Johns sees to cry flesh, flesh, flesh v corner. . . ." Esther yearns to transcend her instinctual life; Hazard's creed builds faith on it."All religion does nothing but pursue me with self even into the next world," she cries.25 Craving boundlessness, Esther reluctantly rejects Hazard's "medieval" notions of personal immortality.

The major alternative to Hazard's outlook emerges at Niagara. For Esther, the falls become an emblem of eternal Being and a challenge to Hazard's anthropomorphic conceptions of immortality. She is drawn toward Strong's declaration that thought alone is eternal. "If you can get hold of one true thought," he tells Esther, "you are immortal as far as that thought goes." A crucial exchange follows:

Does your idea mean that the next world is a sort of great reservoir of truth, and that what is true in us just pours into it like raindrops?"

Welsaie r an puzze gure is ot perfecty corct u the idea is a little of that kind."

"After all I wonder whether that may not be what Niagara has been telling me!" said Esther, and she spoke with an outburst of energy that made Strong's blood run cold.26

Dissolution in the "great reservoir of truth" promises final release from autonomous selfhood. Adam's water imagery connects Niagara with Nirvana; late-Victorian Orientalists commonly used the metaphor of dewdrops dissolving in an ocean to express the attainment of Nirvana. Adams had intellectual and personal reasons for an interest in Oriental mysticism. Popularized in magazine treatments of Oriental culture, "Nirvana" became a catchword within his circle of friends—which included William Sturgis Bigelow.27 Both Adams and Bigelow longed for liberation from rigid ego ideals; both confronted intensifying psychic dilemmas during the 188os. Esther suggested that Adams, too, was pondering the escapes from autonomy promised by Oriental mysticism.

But Adams was unable to share Bigelow's enthusiasm. The ambiguities in the lesson of the falls reflected Adams's own uncertainty. If Hazard's "thirteenth-century ideas"' were intellectually unsatisfying, Strong's pallid doctrine offered little emotional solace. Even the scientist's blood runs cold when Esther reveals the underlying implication of his doctrine: that individuality and immortality are incompatible.28 Immersion in the "reservoir of truth" liberated the seeker from confining self-consciousness, but only by annihilating all but the most abstract component of individuality. The idea that thought is eternal—itself an intellectualist distortion of Oriental mysticism—could have at best a mixed appeal to a man who felt "like Casaubon in Middlemarch."

But there was a third path, winding between the dogmatism of Hazard and the intellectualism of Strong. Adams embodied it in Wharton, whose spiritual turmoil reflected the anxieties behind antimodern vitalism. Ravaged by private demons, eager for childlike innocence but unable to recover it, Wharton is drawn less to Oriental quiescence than to medieval emotionalism. "To me religion is passion," he cries. "To reach Heaven, you must go through hell, and carry its marks on your face and figure." Wharton's conception of religion as Dantean pilgrimage was rooted in his desire for a faith with infinite emotional range. Contemptuous of the theatricality admired by St. John's parishioners, Wharton wants "to go back to the age of beauty and put a Madonna in the heart of their church. The place has no heart." The desire for emotional intensity, the double yearning for maternal consolation and childlike innocence, the belief that religion involves a terrible inner struggle between faith and doubt—Wharton's outlook epitomized many currents in antimodern vitalism.29

It also reflected the most enduring impulses of Henry Adams. Though Wharton remained on the periphery of the novel's plot, his choric commentary suggested Adams's future direction. Admiring Hazard's certitude but unable to share it, burdened by self-consciousness, Adams looked hopefully toward absorption in the "reservoir of truth." But this intellectualist version of Nirvana remained emotionally unsatisfying. A sense of individual selfhood persisted, sustaining the hope of spiritual consolation and personal immortality. Even at this early stage, Adams was drawn toward a heterodox medieval Christianity. Like Wharton, Adams would conceive religion as passion, and would put a Madonna in the heart of his private church.

During the 188os, Adams continued to ponder the path to Nirvana. Obliteration of self still held a certain appeal, especially after his wife's suicide had intensified his anxious introspection. Accompanied by the painter John La Farge, Adams embarked for Japan in 1886. In the Orient, his perceptions remained stereotypically Western: he dismissed Japan as a "child's country." Immersing himself in Buddhist lore, he finally decided it was "a trifle flat and unsatisfactory," By the end of the decade, Adams had rejected Nirvanic self-extinction.30

In part, his disenchantment stemmed from a continuing commitment to Western ideals of autonomous achievement -a commitment which counterbalanced his longings for quiescence. Adams dramatized his conflict between activism and withdrawal in "Buddha and Brahma" (1891). The poem explores the spiritual dilemma of a young disciple of Gautama Buddha. Perplexed by Gautama's refusal to discuss metaphysics, the disciple seeks wisdom from his own father, a Brahman activist"who cannot fly the world" as the Buddha does but instead seeks

To live two separate lives; one, in the world

Which we must ever seem to treat as real;

The other in ourselves, behind a veil

Not to be raised without disturbing both.31

The poem arrives at a protestant conclusion: one may be in the world but not of it. The Brahman's insistence that "Gautama tells me my way too is good" reflected Adams's attempt to sustain his ambivalence. In a sense the Brahman way embodied the "worldly asceticism" of Charles Francis Adams, Sr. Henry Adams's inner loyalty to his father's moral authority blocked the path to Nirvana.

Yet the Brahman's ideal was as problematic as the father's. The idea of a double life was too schematic to sustain ambivalence; it was no more emotionally energizing than Esther' reservoirof truthhad been.Bge low's Nirvanic version of Paradise was equally unsatisfactory: Adams preferred what Bigelow dismissed as "the Fireside"—the domestic ideal of married love. Neither Buddha nor Brahma met Adams's need for generativity; he turned with increasing fascination to a vitalist cult of domesticity.32

Adams's devotion to the domestic ideal intensified strongly after his wife's death. More preoccupied than ever with natural processes of generativity, he built a greenhouse and "took to learning roses." Perpetually anxious, he was "amused and tranquillized" by his feminine companions. Writing letters to his nieces, Adams sometimes pretended he was a small child at his mother's knee; he became their "Dear Dordy," their little boy. His letters to Elizabeth Cameron were less fanciful; they revealed a genuine and deepening dependence. "Please, how are you, today?" he asked in one of the dozens of notes he sent to her home across the square. Or: "The roses are sweet. I feel very belle. How about our ride? Is it off?" Ultimately Mrs. Cameron became the initial focus for Adams's vitalist cult of domesticity.33

In Adams's imagination, Mrs. Cameron epitomized "feminine" values. He vied with Hay and the British diplomat Cecil Spring Rice in praising her beauty and fecundity. A sonnet by Spring Rice, headed "HA to EC," compared her to a "fair magician" bringing "spring in her smile and summer in her eyes" to winter, turning January drabness to "deep green and gold and creamy white." Floral and generative imagery proliferated in the tributes. After she gave birth to a daughter, Martha, in 1887, the maternal symbolism seemed complete. Pathetically devoted to the infant Martha, Adams became passionately obsessed with her mother. Touched by his affections but aware of her delicate position as a senator's wife, Mrs. Cameron realized that the situation threatened to embarrass them both. Finally, in 1891, she fled to Europe, urging her suitor to start his longplanned voyage to the South Seas. Adams reluctantly agreed.34

For Adams, the enforced separation was an emotional ordeal but also a crucial catalyst in widening his sense of selfhood and preparing him for his exploration of medieval Catholicism. Polynesia provided sensuous regeneration. In Japan, Adams had commented wryly on phallic worship, appreciatively on a few nude bathers, and admiringly on the temple of the Goddess Kwannon. But for the most part he had remained inert to unfamiliar sense impressions. Polynesia transformed him, largely because he was ready to be transformed. Visiting Japan, he had faced three more years of work on the History. Now he was finished and eager to "plunge into another existence. ."35

The hallmark of Adams's new existence was his unprecedented sensuous responsiveness. His letters revealed a new sensitivity to color and light, a new vocabulary of concrete shapes and images. Again accompanied by La Farge, he began experimenting with the artist's watercolors, trying to capture this new world "full of life and color." No longer nervous, Adams was eating and sleeping better than he had since Marian's death. "I enjoyed myself, and the sense of living, more than I have in five years," he reported. "I am glad to be dead to the old existence, which was a torture, and to forget it, in a change as complete as that of another planet."36

Infused with a renewed sense of youth, Adams revised his attitude toward the "childlike" traits of primitive peoples. Japanese childishness had been cause for contempt; Samoan childishness was cause for indulgent affection and sometimes admiration. The Samoans were spontaneous, healthy, free from "our idiotic cant about work. . " They were neither nervous nor self-conscious. Indeed, “"I have never lived in so unselfconscious a place," Adams wrote. The limits of Samoan civilization "are a matter of course, but so are those of a delightful child. I still prefer the child and the limitations, as I prefer La Farge's unfinished sketches."37

Adams's enthusiasm for Samoan childishness was more than a tourist's fancy; it revealed his own rediscovery of childlike traits within himself. Before he left America he had begun to connect childhood not only with emotional dependence but also with a vital sensuous life. After his mother died in June, 1889, Adams spent several weeks at the family home in Quincy. Revisiting childhood haunts, he concluded that his senses had been "cut down to a kind of dull consciousness": he could not recover the acute sensuous experience of his youth. When his senses reawakened in the South Seas, Adams felt a childlike exuberance return. He repeatedly told his correspondents: "La Farge and I are schoolboys on a lark." At the same time, in the old Tahitian chiefess Marau Taaroa he found another i pendntpues. He ecme eopton, ce her family traditions in Memoirs fMarau Taroa (181). His veneration for a vitalist tinge.38

Rediscovering sensuous experience among the childlike Samoans, Adams moved toward a reverence for natural fecundity and instinctual vitality. Antimodern vitalism channelled Adams's private cult of domesticity into public cultural currents. Like many of the upper bourgeoisie, Adams suffered from what he called "our common epidemic of neurastheni. He shared the neurasthenics' sense of helpless anxiety (particularly during his periodic depressions) and their yearnings for psychic regeneration. By the 189os, antimodern cultural forms were focusing those yearnings, directing them toward cults of inner and outer experience. Originating in his urge for generativity, Adams's antimodern vitalism linked his personal quest with the wider antimodern response to the crisis of cultural authority.

Adams's developing antimodern outlook, like that of his contemporaries, was shaped by class fears and ethnic prejudices as well as by lingering republican moralism. His History had discussed the enervating effects of luxury, the purgative powers of war, and the decline of the hero in mass society. The economic and social unrest of the 189os reinforced those concerns and led Adams toward apocalyptic fantasies of destruction. Lamenting that "our old-fashioned liberalism"" was obsolete, he joined the patrician chorus denouncing goldbugs, Jews, and socialists. "I want to put every money-lender to death, and to sink Wall Street and Lombard Street under the Ocean," he wrote in the panic year of 1893. "Then perhaps, men of our kind might have some chance of being honorably killed in battle and eaten by our enemies."40

Henry's fantasies paralleled those of his brother Brooks, whose Law of Civilization and Decay focused Henry's rage. Identifying the goldbug as the embodiment of modern greed and unearned luxury, the Law seemed to provide a historical justification for anti-Semitism. Like the clerical reactionaries of Europe, the Adams brothers merged capitalist, usurer, and International Jew, declaring a plague on all their houses and exalting the Christian knight of the Middle Ages as an untainted alternative. In the Adams's updating of republican mythology, the ascendance of the goldbug symbolized the sterility of a civilization unmanned by prosperity.

For a time, Henry followed Brooks's lead in seeking a revitalized identity through a racist cult of violence. Imperialist adventures temporarily leavened his despair—but only temporarily. Unlike Brooks, Henry quickly concluded that military adventure was only a palliative for the modern malaise. By 19o1, he was cautioning Brooks that "violence is always waste."41

As early as 1895, when Henry was discovering medieval culture in

French cathedrals as well as in the Law, his letters revealed that his antimodern impulse was far more than the reflex of a "displaced patrician." To be sure, they betrayed the provincial ethnocentrism of a Brahmin who fancied himself a descendant of Norman warrior-farmers; but they also showed that class and ethnic prejudice was only one component of a vitalist sentiment with aesthetic, psychological, and religious dimensions.

The aesthetic concern manifested itself in several ways. Adams was so impressed by the artistry of Coutances, Mont St.-Michel, and Chartres that he persuaded Brooks to include a chapter on aesthetic decline in the Law. The stained glass alone convinced Henry that "modern man has lost at least one sense; that of color." He railed against the overcivilization of contemporary professional artists: "never a picture or a figure is felt, " he complained to a niece in 1897. The loss of artistic feeling betokened a more general enervation. The twelfth century, Adams grew fond of saying, "never knew ennui." The violent tenor of life, the deep contrast between wealth and poverty, saint and sinner, all made the Middle Ages "more amusing" than modern times.42 The desire to be "amused," to savor experience as spectacle and titillation, was an outgrowth of Adams's sensuous reawakening in Samoa. It connected him with Harvard dandies and Wildean poseurs.

But it would be a mistake to stress that connection too strongly. Despite his epicurean pose, Adams (like Norton) remained wary of fin-de-siècle aestheticism. In Esther, he had attacked the substitution of theatricality for religion; he continued to do so during the 18gos. As he told his niece, "Art and religion are really states of mind. They become bric-à-brac the moment they are made a show."43 To Adams, medieval artifacts were less important as amusements than as keys to medieval "states of mind."

The complexity of Adams's fascination with medieval mentalities appeared in a letter to John Hay, recounting a visit to Coutances cathedral in 1895. As in other letters, Adams fancied himself a medieval warriorfarmer.

I was a vassal of the Church; I held farms—for I was many—in the Cotentin and around Caen, but the thing I did by a great majority of ancestors was to help in building the cathedral of Coutances, and my soul is still built into it. I can almost remember the faith that gave me energy, and the scared boldness that made my towers seem to me so daring, with the bits of gracefulness that I hasarded with some doubts whether the divine grace could properly be shown outside. Within I had no doubts. There the contrite sinner was welcomed with such tenderness as makes me still wish I were one. There is not a stone in the whole interior which I did not treat as though it were my own child.44

Adams's language suggested the diverse impulses behind his antimodern vitalism. Like other late-Victorian neurasthenics, he admired the medieval cathedral as an emblem of triumphant will; medieval religion was admirable not because it was true but because it gave men energy and purpose. Strengthened by the fin-de-siècle sense of cultural crisis, Adams's desire to transcend self-absorbed ennui was rooted in his private longings for generativity: it was not accidental that he imagined treating each stone as "my own child." At the same time, Adams's wish for divine forgiveness revealed his continuing need for expiation—the aftermath of the long self-punishing depression that had followed Marian's death. His personal plight combined with a dis-ease typical of the wider culture, leading him to yearn for spiritual as well as sensuous authenticity.

In Adams as in his contemporaries, the desire for spiritual authenticity stemmed from dissatisfaction with liberal Protestantism—from the feeling, articulated most clearly by Nietzsche, that Protestant culture had evaporated into "weightlessness." After his Unitarian upbringing, Adams revealed a deepening respect for older, sterner creeds. Though their visions of damnation were terrifying, they seemed to possess greater intellectual depth and profounder emotional range than their liberal successors. This new attitude was evident in the satire of Esther, in the critique of Unitarian vacuity at the conclusion of the History, and in the growing sympathy Adams showed toward medieval Catholicism during the 189os. By 1900, Adams was criticizing St. George Mivart for his attempt to liberalize the orthodox Catholic conception of hell. "In my view," Adams wrote, "Hell is all there was to make life worth living. Since it was abolished, there is no standard of value. Hell is the foundation of Heaven, and now costs nothing and measures nothing."5 Without a supernatural framework of meaning, ethical boundaries seemed blurred and spiritual experience merely self-referential.

Adams's reaction against liberal Protestanism had both philosophical and personal significance. It signified his revolt against the authority of modern culture as well as his belated rebellion against his father, who embodied that authority and instilled it in his sons. While Henry grew increasingly hostile toward secular progressivism and the male achievement ethos (the basis of modern authority), he also cooled toward the memory of his father and toward his brother Charles—his surrogate father since early manhood. Eager to elude Charles's hectoring "family lectures," Henry began to avoid him at every turn. When Charles began to prepare a memoir of their father, Henry's revulsion was acute—and revealing. Extracts from the father's diary betrayed traits Henry sought to expunge in himself: morbid introspection, pointless repression of passion. "The stale smell of dead anxieties makes me sick," he confided to Brooks. "The effect of reading Charles's book is only to make this feeling keener, and to stimulate all my twelfth century instincts." Flying to the twelfth century was an acceptable form of revolt against paternal values;

writing the memoir would have involved an unendurable symbolic confrontation with the father. Even reading it was painful: for Henry, the memoir called up a host of buried aggressive impulses. "Now I understand why I refused so obstinately to do it myself," he wrote Elizabeth Cameron. "These biographies are murder, and in this case, to me, would be both patricide and suicide. . . . I have sinned myself and deeply, and am no more worthy to be called anything, but, thank my diseased and dyspeptic nervous wreck, I did not assassinate my father."46

Adams's impulse toward a kind of symbolic patricide took the subtle, X sublimated form of antimodern cultural criticism—animated by a vitalist cult of domesticity, focused on an archaic feminine principle. The apotheosis of "feminine" values was not exactly a model for Adams's behavior: it was a maternal complement for his desire to recover his own childlike traits of sensuous vitality, emotional dependence, and innocent faith. Etherealizing his passion for Elizabeth Cameron into a veneration for the Virgin of Chartres, Adams joined his private cult of domesticity to wider currents of fascination with a primitive Great Mother.

Like G. Stanley Hall, Adams was familiar with the matriarchal theory of social development originated by the Swiss anthropologist J. J. Bachofen and disseminated in the English-speaking world by such scholars as Lewis Henry Morgan, Lester Frank Ward, and Sir James Frazer. For some readers, matriarchal anthropology might meld with antimodern vitalism. The primitive matriarchies were peaceful, agricultural societies: they enshrined woman as the emblem of the tilled and holy earth; they embodied the principle of fecundity tamed by maternal love. From the "masculine" and progressive view, patriarchal society was superior because it was more antimodern vitalism, matriarchy was superior because it was more firmly rooted in unconscious, instinctual reality. Like Hall, Adams adopted the latter view.47

Yet Adams, too, remained wary of the "feminine" realm. For him as for early depth psychologists, the association of femininity with the unconscious suggested not only mythopoeic inspiration but also uncontrolled, amoral impulse—and ultimately the smothering unconsciousness of death. The Great Mother was both creator and destroyer. As early as 1876, in a lecture on "The Primitive Rights of Women," Adams had noted the ferocity shown by women of "the heroic age," whose aggressiveness contrasted with "the modern type of Griselda,—the meek and patient, the silent and tender sufferer, the pale reflection of the Mater Dolorosa. . . ." Vitalism uncovered alternatives to the pallid mid-Victorian ideal, but they were threatening as well as reassuring.48 Like other late-Victorian dissenters, Adams preserved vestigial commitments to male ego ideals, to individual autonomy and conscious control. He felt a mingled longing and fear toward the "feminine" realm—longing for release from his father's values, fear that release might mean oceanic oblivion. Projecting his ambivalence onto his personal mother-goddess, the Virgin of Chartres, Adams fashioned his most deeply felt work.
