> 来源：Architecture theory since 1968 (Hays, K. Michael)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Architecture theory since 1968 (Hays, K. Michael)\Architecture theory since 1968 (Hays, K. Michael).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Part 2: Architectural Research Programs in the Work of Le Corbusier

The present essay does not offer the scope for a detailed analysis of an architectural research program, but will rather illustrate such an approach through selected works of Le Corbusier. Two early projects, the young Jeanneret-Le Corbusier's sketches at the Acropolis and his Maison Dom-ino, will be presented as independent, not fully developed architectural programs. These rudimentary programs are then seen as weakly conflated in the Maison La Roche. With the Five Points of the mid 1920s, the Maison Dom-ino receives an important reinterpretation capable of subsuming the earlier concepts in a new, coherent program which is progressively realized in the major villas of the late 1920s.6

## Promenade Architecturale

The first fragmentary program turns on the concept which Le Corbusier was later to call the promenade architecturale. Perhaps this term could be read as "architecture considered as the orchestration of spatial experience."

Such a concept may not sound so startling today, but one must remember that well into the nineteenth century treatises on architecture relied primarily on an objective view of the autonomous rules of architecture itself, best exemplified in the study of the classical orders. Even movements, such as the "picturesque," that put new emphasis on the viewer interpreted the relation between viewer and object as one based more on association than on abstract issues of perception and comprehension.

When Jeanneret-Le Corbusier, on his "voyage d'orient" of 1, came to the ultimate canonic site of Western architecture, the Acropolisin Atens, h ddnot repeatr ek tomak more prei the earl rces in te orders, the temple form, or their sophisticated formal nuances. Le Corbusier rather produced a set of sketches which vividly evoke the sequential experienceof the ascent of the Acropolis. From outside the Propylaea, we are already embraced by the heights of the Acropolis and the Temple of Athena Nike above. Passing into the Propylaea, the Parthenon appears through a screen of columns. Though these columns are just before the viewer, or precisely because they are so near, one does not see them as wholes. These columns are a screen, not sophisticated elements of precise proportions and prescribed relations to the whole of which they are a part.

The Parthenon itself, more distant, suggests an ordered whole, but for now that order is a matter both of prior knowledge and the anticipation of our fuller experience of it. For the moment, the Parthenon appears not only partially obscured but also viewed from angles, from the side and from below. We hold no vantage point from which we may possess the building objectively. And if we did possess such a vantage point, this drawing tells us we would be missing something else—experience itself and the knowledge which comes only through such experience. Architecture is known by the temporal experience of a sentient being, and Le Corbusier's drawing reveals the Acropolis in such a way as to make this proposition plausible.

Though this material offers only the rudiments of a program, I do see here elements which fit the model I am advancing. At a conceptual level, Le Corbusier is concerned with how we correlate experience and knowledge. He pro-u architecture or culture; we do not rely on associations. The manner of experience and how we learn through that experience is transferable to other settings. If it is important that this exercise considers the Parthenon, it is precisely because this insistence on experience is more forceful when made in the presence of a work for which we have previously instillemodes  approriation.Yet the hysical models—he Acropolis itself as well as Le Corbusier's drawings-are crucial to this fragmentary rerch program: the Acropolis ffording the pportunity  test out the propositions which the drawings advance.

## The Maison Dom-ino

For the moment, we turn to another rudimentary and wholly independent research program well known under the name Maison Dom-ino.' The devastation of Flanders in the First World War urgently required the rehabilitation of that region at the earliest possible date. Already interested in the relatively new building material, reinforced concrete, Le Corbusier sought a way to provide a rational and economic solution to the emergency housing need.

The drawing which shows the standardized skeleton used in this research project, a drawing summary in nature and rich in suggestive ambiguity, came to stand for the Maison Dom-ino. We too will wish to return to this famous drawing, but if we are to understand the housing research program which generated it, we must also consider other contemporary drawings. The reflected ceiling plan reveals that floor and roof slabs of the construction are not monolithic as they appear in the Maison Dom-ino drawing, but are rather articulated as girders and joists formed by lightweight tiles. Thus the floor construction is directional and has preferred locations for attachments such as non-bearing partitions. Indeed, possible floor plans drawn by Le Corbusier show close adherence not only to the structural lines of the floor construction, but even especially to such dominant structural characteristics as the columns and the edges of the slabs. Nonbearing walls bury the columns at the end walls. Nonbearing partitions uniformly frame into internal columns. These partitions, not as thick as the columns, are normally placed so as to obscure the presence of the columns in the more important rooms; the projecting part of any column remains in closets, vestibules, or service spaces.

These few observations together with the architect's own commentary permit a reconstruction of the main lines of Le Corbusier's Maison Domino research. The reinforced concrete frame provides the entire structure and thus permits a rationalization of the construction process. Government, in support of a modern construction industry (which Le Corbusier sought to form), would effectively provide the standardized structural frame. The infill of that frame could be carried out according to the needs and constraints imposed locally; on whatever schedule local, not necessarily skilled, workmen using local, perhaps rubble, materials would complete the houses to variant plans and elevations.

Conceptually, the Maison Dom-ino, as a housing research projo hat neaals   qu e an inustry an effiently provi a primary truture which will facilitate the sui of a crucial housing problem without inhibiting the efficient and positive employment of local resources.

The Maison Dom-ino, seen in the context of the entire housing research project, does not imply other readings which the skeletal drawing has induced. That famous drawing appears to emphasize primary structure so forcefully that an unintended reading must also have been immediately available: architecture, or this new architecture based on a modern technology, should give direct expression to structural elements. Yet the plastering of the ceiling surfaces in this drawing and the burying of the columns in the typical plans render the structure mute. Neither here nor in any work in his career did Le Corbusier make expression of structure dominant.

Other readings of the Maison Dom-ino, some of them proffered and exploited by Le Corbusier later in his career, were not immediately available if we consider the original housing research as a whole. Some of these readings are: the primary structure as the ordering of space, as an aesthetic order, as the facilitator of the "free plan," as a module of an indefinitely vast system, as a modernist selfreferential system. Most of these readings are too commonly diffused to be given specific references. Le Corbusier's "free plan" is discussed below. The Maison Domino as a modernist self-referential system is an anachronistic reading offered by Peter Eisenman.8 Such readings reveal the fruitfulness of continued inquiry into such a rewardingly ambiguous drawing as that of the Maison Dom-ino. It is a nonconservative model. But the very limits of the complete Maison Dom-ino research project preclude the inclusion of these innovations in the historical moment of the Maison Dom-ino.

## Towards an Architecture

Thh phatheer  y inucuallyerg hereeLCur ii works within a research program (or programs) of increasingly rich implication.

The first work I introduce, the Maison La Roche in Paris, offers a marvelously diverse architectural promenade which can sill be enjoyed today in this house, which is now the Fondation Le Corbusier. Indeed, the Maison La Roche is o dominantly "architecture considered as the orchestration of spatial experience that one wishes only to encourage a visit. If words can have any hold on this house, they must be used almost solely in the service of description.

The Maison La Roche flanks and closes the end of a small private street. The house, or one part of the house, announces itself from afar, a taut convex surface that immediately conveys more of the interior volume than of the entrance, zao Coming nearer, the fank of the house at the right side of the street becomes more prominent. The humble openings of the ground floor of this lateral wing, the now obvious open space under the convex volume, and the retreat of that convexity into the juncture of the two wings continue to lead us into the angle of the L. Near he wa h gl iu metal door. The conviction of entrance is given less by the door than by the large window above, through which we perceive a small skylight obliquely above the entrance space which rises to the flat roof. Just behind the second floor window is a bridge that assures continuity of movement between the two wings. Admitted to the house, one is under the bridge, initiated to a large space that is compressed in its depth by the proximate, blank party wall, but released in the three-story-high volume o this central, commúnicating space. The party wall beyond slides continuously out ot all eali  r he s c y aoer mall balcy a theete ai proec c into the sac n which we now stand, and a perfect pendant to the exterior balcony we still anticipate at the v corner of the house and site, we are afforded the best, most distanced view of the entrance hall with its galleries at each floor. At the head of the stair, the balcony suspends us in theenrnce hal a allry caries us either  the brige t the ltal wing or directly to the salon in the convex volume: a two-story space lit by high clerestories. To reach the curving ramp that ascends at the interior of the convex, now concave walloe must o othe r corner,  theexterior balcony from whic one can recapitulate one's every movement from initial entrance to the street to the interor riewe haveye crossAscending heramp more snsoy-or epawoup   l salon an then  ly r vekg tentc  The at ro is now osever e's head that that plane t pay  stiiverole as hav ma other surfaces, in defining place and movement within this orchestration of spatial experience.

One could, and perhaps should continue this verbal tour, particularly to do justice to the roof garden and its potential link with the other unit of this double house fully known as the Maison La Roche-Jeanneret. Enough has been said to expose one's conviction that Le Corbusier achieved here an exceptional architectural promenade, devoid of easy associations, yet as lyrical and compelling as it is abstract. If at the Acropolis, the concept of architectural promenade afforded another and valuable reading of a canonic site, then at the Maison La Roche Le Corbusier invents an architecture that offers another compelling promenade.

Still, there are reservations. For all the qualities of this house, of this promenade, the experience is very particular, self-indulgent, lacking in convincing relation to other aspects of architecture. The awkward narrow L-shape of the La Roche site is well exploited by Le Corbusier, but the only generalization to be drawn is just that: exploit the site. The Maison La Roche does use some reinforced concrete construction; but this and all other matters of structure, form and function are placed in ad hoc service to the promenade which is, finally, too arbitrary. The Maison La Roche offers an artifactual research program that is all enticing auxiliary hypotheses, devoid of hard core principles and played out in a special context that constrained all empirical conditions to ensure realization of the not fully developed program.

If Le Corbusier creatively advanced a new reading of the Acropolis, there his architectural promenade stood alongside, did not displace, earlier formal, systemic and iconographic readings. Architecture, and most notably the Parthenon, remains for Le Corbusier "a pure creation of the mind," even as it is revealed to us experientially. The architectural promenade of the Maison La Roche received too little support from the other dimensions of architecture.

## The Five Points

ll i , grate many ape rchtecure incuding anew readinghis Maison Dom and an implicit architectural promenade.

The crucial and first of the Five Points is the point support of the modern concrete or steel frame. The minimal footprint of these columns—pilotis in Le Corbusier's terminology—was an obvious feature of the new structural systems, but Le Corbusier drew some not so obvious, pregnant architectural conclusions.

Contrasting the modern frame system with traditional bearing wall construction, Le Corbusier emphasized that walls as space dividers and enclosure need not coincide with structure, indeed need not be present at all. The building need no longer stand on a basement but could rise free of the ground save for its sparse array of columns. At each floor, and without traditional constraints due to vertical structural continuities, walls and partitions could be located at will, yielding a "free plan." The structurally efficient fat slabs also yielded the flat, and thus usable roof surface. Cantilever construction placed the columns inward from the edge of the building, further enhancing the free plan and fulfilling what was already implicit in the free plan: the free facade. At all points, the wall might be present or not. No vertical structural element existed at the outer limits of the construction; thus the facade might assume any configuration.

It is here that one notes a significant anomaly both in Le Corbusier's diagrams and in his inclusion of a fifth point. The diagram for the free plan suggests a bold exploitation of this freedom except at the edges of the building. The implicit radicalness of the free facade is not diagrammed save in the inclusion of a fifth point: the strip window. Logically, the strip window (though importantly distinctive in that it reveals the absence of vertical structural members) should/ be only one instance of the general freedom of the facade. Indeed, the strip window is in many ways a rather constraining element; it requires uniformity in the extension of the facade and limits variation of the floor levels or other manipulations in section.

The Five Points reveal a distinctive, positive relation of architecture and new technology as conceived by Le Corbusier. The new architecture Le Corbusier proposes is not possible without the new materials and new structural systems. Yet what Le Corbusier advocates is neither the necessary conclusion (the modern frame had been, and continues to be, used otherwise) nor the ultimate exploitation of the new technology. Le Corbusier is not concerned with the exhibition of structure or of structural principle, but rather with the architectural potential afforded by the new technology. By the time of the Five Points, Le Corbusier seeks an architecture that is consonant with larger forces that he wishes both to identify and advance: an esprit nouveau. The free plan and free facade are generated by new conceptions of the environment and the city, of manner of life and thought generated by such matters and only facilitated by the new technologies. By the same token, there is no compulsion to use the technology to its limits; one uses technology to the extent and in the way it serves one's program. And this esprit nouveau is not solely about new potentials and freedoms; it is also heir to a Western rationalist tradition that expects these freedoms to exist within a cognitive and moral order. It is for such reasons, I believe, that Le Corbusier restrained himself from the more extravagant readings of free plan or free facade. In the Five Points he sought what was not adequately present in the Maison La Roche, a knowing interrelation of many aspects of architecture, including matriuepcerail iconography, and intellectual order.

## The Five Pand he San heM

The first projects for the villa at Garches reveal a coincidence rather than a coordination of the subsidiary research programs we have been tracing. Early sketches show Le Corbusier considering a systematic use of a reinforced concrete frame: a system of square bays, one of which provides a central enclosed core throughout the height of the building and off which other bays radiate to form a complex of enclosed and ope spaces, terraces and covered gardens. The L-plan of the Maison La Roche reappears and a passion for the architectural promenade overwhelms all else including the facilitating frame. After several such early projects, Le Corbusier quickly designed the villa Stein much as it came to be built: a compact rectangular volume coherent with the implications of the Five Points.

A photograph taken by or for Le Corbusier is a key to the understanding o the Villa Stei. The phoographer place us just of the sburban seet, under the functionally gratuitous canopy of the porter's lodge. From this position, just as when one viewed the Maison La Roche from afar, one can anticipate much about the eventual experience of the house. However, unlike the Maison La Roche, here the first impression also yields many clues that are simultaneously part of our intellectual framework and characteristic of the house. The ground surface on which we stand not only extends in a continuous plane up to the facade of the house but implicitly extends through the body of the house itself. It is extraordinary for a European house, particularly a house of distinction, to provide such unmediated access to its interior. The Villa Stein, as built, does not stand free on pilotis, but virtually it does.

Reflecting again on the photograph, we are positioned under the thcnoy at stan  themi ue uburbn spacestant fom nees. It reacesut into a ace wi srnr reerece to theditnt vitn o theloe o whic  is attac. It doe thescale thevilla Bete and canopy we already know the physical reality of floor planes marked out by the strip windows of the facade of the villa. The orthogonality of the spatial grid of the vil and the perspectivally recessive plane of the wall of the lodge at our right which contrasts with the frontal plane of the villa. The necessity of our movement and sequential appropriation of this site is obvious, but we also know that this acquisition will be facilitated by correspondences between our preexisting mental structure of a gridded space and the actual deployment of architectural form. There is an assumption that our rationality rests on certain categories and an order which architecture— "pure creation of the mind"—makes manifest.

The present context does not permit a description of the experience of the Villa Stein comparable to that already given for the Maison La Roche. But if this were done it would be clear that the vitality of the architectural promenade has lost nothing for being located within an ordering framework which the architecture makes concrete just as the framework facilitates the appropriation of the architectural order.

The Villa Stein is a successful integration of the architectural promenade and of the Maison Dom-ino programs, but only if we recognize an interpretation of the Maison Dom-ino other than that of its origins. Like the Maison Domino, the Villa Stein distinguishes primary structure and infill. Now, however, this distinction has nothing to do with staging of construction or other pragmatic issues. Nor is the primary structure assertive in the establishment of a spatial or other architectural order. It is well known that the Villa Stein is set out on a plaid grid of 3 x 5 bays or 4 X 6 columns. 1° Here as in the Maison Dom-ino the columns at the end walls are suppressed. At the principal floor of the house, if we consider the 16 internal column locations, two columns are completely eliminated and only five stand free, in positions that yield no easy clues to the larger order. The architectural order of the Villa Stein relies on the structurally secondary planar organization; the concrete frame permits a free plan which secures this desired order.

Space does not here permit discussion of another of the great villas o thelate 10, the Villa Savoye a Poissy. While the columnar ystem  te Villa Savoye takes on architectural prominence, a sustained analysis would show, I argue, that the columnar system here too is subservient to the planar organization of the secondary structure. The columnar system becomes apparent; it is not, however, an overall coherent system and, where it is ordered, it reinforces the planar system.

## The Four Compositions

After the design of the Villa Savoye, Le Corbusier made a diagram which reflected on the research program presented here. The diagram is called "The Four Compositions," presenting a sketch plan, aerial view and comments on four houses: the Maison La Roche, the villa at Garches, a house identified as that at Stuttgart though it has more affinities with the villa at Carthage, and the Villa Savoye.

Only the aerial view of the Maison La Roche is in perspective, a fact that accords with Le Corbusier's own comments, freighted with implicit criticism. He sees this house as of a "very facile genre, picturesque, eventful; one could, however, discipline it by classification and hierarchy." In contrast, the other three houses are first grouped as "cubic compositions (pure prisms)" and then differentiated. Of the rigorous, prismatic composition of the villa at Garches, Le Corbusier notes "very difficult (satisfaction of the mind)."

The third composition exploits the five points as they seem literally to invite but which, as we have seen, Le Corbusier resisted. The column grid is taken as given and the plan and elevation may be what they will. Le Corbusier again appears to imply a self-criticism of the third composition:"very easy, practical, combinable."

Le Corbusier's comments on the Villa Savoye suggest his sense of a satisfactory conclusion of this search for an architectural order simultaneously practical and satisfying to the mind: "very generous; one recognizes at the exterior an architectural will; at the interior, one satisfies all the functional needs (admission of sunlight, contiguities, circulation)."

## Conclusion

In this presentation I did not seek to marshal a detailed analysis of Le Corbusier's work using the full battery of Lakatos's methodological concepts and terminology. I did seek to present a number of works, the earliest of which are too limited to represent architectural research programs but which nonetheless contributed to such a full program as delineated in the period of the Five Points.

What was constant before and after that juncture is a dialectic conducte between sets of conceptual isues and developing physical models which explicate, test, and induce revision of those conceptual issues.

A detailed analysis of these works, making claims as to what conceptual and artifactual research programs would itself be a historiographic re searc program. No doubt a rst versin would fal o ritcim, but in that expoition and criticism our understanding would be enlarged and reinforced. Even the present informal presentation correlates certain physicl features and programmatic concerns, denying other available readings and thus opening an arena of debate.

An important issue arose with the most famous of the Maison Dom-ino drawings. Its mbiguity as a source orinfuential alterative reding is readily welcomed. However, these alternatives are not acknowledged until they are iennpye attesin, ui osly h s.  u T ino bore meanings in the mid-1920s which it could not have possessed before. In a full exposition I would like to continue this story down to the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard. By that time Le Corbusier's understanding of architecture a cffnfnt h pi doms of the Five Points was necessary and, with that, the acceptance of another readi  the Main Do. On te ceilu  ca and o our understanding of a work such as the Carpenter Center, but also what value and w L architecture.

## Notes

1. Imre Lakatos, The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).

Karl Popper, The Logir f Sientifc Discovery (New York:Basic Books, 1959).

Thoas Kuhe Structur  ScientifRevoluions hicagniversiyhicgre, 1962).

4Yehuda Elkana, "A Programmatic Attempt at an Anthropology of Knowledge," typescript distributed at the conference "Conventions, Canons and Criticism," Massachusetts Institute of Technology, April 1982.

5.See, for example, Elkana's paper cited in note 4.

Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete 1910-1929 (1929; Zurich: Girsberger, 1964), pp. 23, 128129, 189, and passim.

7E. Gregh, "The Dom-ino Idea," Oppositions 15/16 (Winter/Spring 1979), pp. 65-87.

8. Peter Eisenman, "Aspects of Modernism: Maison Dom-ino and the Self-Referential Sign," Oppositions 15/16 (Winter/Spring 1979), pp. 118-128.

Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture (1923; London: The Architectural Press, 1964), pp. 185 ff

Colin Rowe, "The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa,"in Rowe, The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa and Other Essays (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1976); Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky, "Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal," in ibid.

Theory is ready to travel. While at its best theory will stay close to the historicity of its see x-xii material, mediating between architectural practice and specific historical and social contexts, theoretical constructions also possess an uncanny capacity to cross over, drift, and expand in culture, however much authors, institutions, and orthodoxies try to confine them. Theory is nourished by circulation—by borrowing and trading, by unconscious influence or wholesale appropriation — but, through the accidents of its own history, a body of theory can also be dislodged and pressed into the service of a quite different one, reinvested with unexpected content, and refunctioned to perform unsuspected functions.

The mid-198os seemed to be a time when theoretical movements of different sorts became recognizable, not the least of which were the transactions among French poststructuralism, the architecture theory of Italy, and professional architectural practice in both those countries—all of which constitutes Jean-Louis Cohen's problematic of traveling theory—to which one could add the analogous Italophilia of North America and Spain.² While Cohen's concise and specific history of these movements is in no way a condemnation of the instrumentalization of theory as an aid in the retooling of design practice, it is a reminder that, if theory's real subject is history, theory must also constantly historicize itself. Theory, as much as architecture, has to be grasped in the place and time out of which it emerges; we must attend to the different reasons theory is begun and the unforeseen uses to which those beginnings can actually be put.

Perhaps we could go so far as to say that part of the job of ha siv  iv il

## Note

1. emaion DenhaveihenL ohen, "L'architettura intellettualizzata: 1970-199o," Casabella 586-587 (January—February 1992).

In the mid-1970s the French became fascinated with Italian architectural culture. This fascination was to provide a key resource for the reconstruction of architecture as a discipline, as it converged with new state policies and with the specific questions asked by architects in the period after 1968. A radical reform of architectural education giving official sanction to the introduction of the social sciences into the architecture schools was matched, after 1972, by the actions of the Architectural Research group founded in the wake of the Lichnérowicz report in 1970. The report proposed:

The rapid creation of a research community, a milieu bringing together people and teams of all types;

The acquisition and dissemination of methods and knowledge, including the new fundamentals on which architectural creativity must rest, and the processes of programming, design, and realization which are necessary to give shape to this creativity.

Among the themes which emerged from this field of research, those of urban architecture and history rapidly came to be seen as essential, alongside the sociological concerns which had marked the beginnings of the inquiry. These themes not only contributed to the production of research but also spread into the domain of the project, as if to demonstrate the close ties between intellectual culture and architecture which characterize the Italian scene. Thus, even as the idea of urban architecture made headway and the notions of typology and morphology worked their way into the thinking of certain professors, a building by one of the theorists of typo-morphology—the Gallaratese complex by Carlo Aymonino—-lent its stimulus to the projects of Paul Chemetov.² The identification of such lines of influence enables us to note once again how the Italophile phenomenon acted to reveal the split between architects and intellectuals. What was at stake in Carlo Aymonino's work, as his interest in the section demonstrates, is in fact a reference to Le Corbusier's Unité d'Habitation. This is the reference that Chemetov picked up at one remove, allowing him to go beyond the neo-brutalist touches in the details and trim of his buildings—an earlier form of homage to Le Corbusier— and to add a consideration of the large dimension to more linear projects.

## The French Sources of Italian Discourses

Such indirect relations to a tradition rooted in French culture would not only show study, in a series o theoretical themes which are seemingly exterior to the feld o I as sumarized in The Architecture of the City, is inscribed in the French tradition o urban geography, whose influence extended to the Institut d'Urbanisme at the University of Paris in the time of Marcel Poëte, and indeed, to the entire French school of geography. Rossi had actually rediscovered Pote before the latter's work was reprinted in France (thanks to the clairvoyance of Hubert Tonka)³ and at a moment when his contribution had been practically forgotten in the very places where his activity had developed, at least to judge from the rather technocratic city planning class taught by Robert Auzelle at the Institut d'Urbanisme.4 But in his search for historical and theoretical references authorizing his understanding of the city as an architectural ensemble, Rossi took a broader interest in the production of the French social sciences, from La mémoire colective by Maurice Halbwachs to Tristes tropiques by Lévi-Strauss.® In addition to the in-house tradition of the Institut d'Urbanisme, from Poëte to Lavedan, he evoked the work of geographers like Georges Chabot and Jean Tricart, whose respective contributions to the notions of u cin  morholy e eRoss o tok st  Mx Sorre's thinking onurban geography and ecology One may suppose that hisfamiliarity with these undertakings is a result of Pierre Georges's efforts to spread the doctrines of French geography through Italy, from an initial point of contact in Turin.

In the field of philosophy, the ideas of Sartre and Merleau-Ponty remained a dead letter for French architects in the fifties, and were to find no more than a weak echo thirty years later through an often superficial reading of The Phenomenology of Perception. In Italy, however, these ideas were taken up and promulgated by Enzo Paci, who communicated them to the Milanese architectural milieu.

As for Roland Barthes, he was mentioned by Manfredo Tafuri as early as Theories and History of Architecture,8 long before French architectural circles paid any real attention to the nouvelle critique; Tafuri used Barthes to help unravel the tangle of semiotic theories that had been hastily applied to architectural objects. Only some six years later would the reference to Barthes be made official, in the debates of a conference staged by the Institut de I'Environnement in 1974, "Histoire et théories de l'architecture." This event, whose title paraphrased Tafuri's subtle play of plurals, was practically the birth announcement of Italophilia. It also constituted the first outlines of a reference to Michel Foucault, whose work had already inspired a few undertakings by the CORDA group. 1° But once again, it was in Venice that Foucault's discourse would be most actively sought, though not always well understood. The same would be true of Deleuze, further along in the catalogue of theoretical fashions: it was again Tafuri who drew upon the French philosopher, following the work of Rella. "1

In a less immediate way, Tafuri's latest attempts to redefine his "historical project" resonate both with Lacan's analytic discourse, through the comparison between historical inquiry and "interminable analysis,"12 and with a type of historical work which itself has emerged from the histoire des mentalités, another pruc  re ulture.Tu whie nac be t ocil sc nd architectural theory was only being made rather timidly by a few fringe figures in France, it was much more rapid and apparently more fruitful in Italy. No doubt this explains why French readers should have turned to Italian texts to discover themes that were easily accessible to them in terms of language, and yet at the same time very distant, because of the split.

## The Breadth of Interest in Italy

What paths would the discovery of Italian architectural culture follow to a wider audience in France? Adopting multiple channels, from teaching to research, from journals to organized tours, from conferences to translations of books and articles, a veritable network of relatively unequal exchanges grew up between the two countries. This import business had its brokers, its insurance men, its creditors and debtors, and it permitted small quantities of symbolic capital to be amassed on either side of the Alps, to borrow Bourdieu's image.

Long-standing personal connections would be complemented by new friendships, allowing the most fertile initiatives to appear: thus behind the special Italy sections of journals like Architecture Mouvement Continuité or L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui, it is easy to uncover the special relations between Roman or Venetian groups and particular figures on the Paris scene.

This curiosity toward Italian architectural culture must nonetheless be situated within a far larger current of interest in Italian culture, a current which marked the early 1970s and extended far beyond the spheres of cinema and literature (even if the discovery of figures such as Bertolucci and Sciascia was considerable). The political situation of Italy after mai rampant, with the strategy of union unity, and even more importantly, the presence of a communist party whose deep connection to cultural and intellectual life made it very different from its counterpart across the Alps, proved fascinating for many intellectuals on the French left, particularly since it was combined with the discovery of Gramsci's work, which had finally been well translated.13 Gramsci's importance should not be underestimated; the discovery of the concept of hegemony, for example, brought into question an entire dogmatic tradition concerning the relation between politics and culture (a tradition already shaken up by Althusser's work). At the same time, Gramsci's analysis of the question of the state would allow for a less schematic approach to the total set of state functions.1 This climate of interest in the world of Italian theory and politics is not unrelated to the echoes raised in France by experiments like the renovation of the city center of Bologna, which was precisely at the crossroads between the innovative political strategies of the PCI (Italian Communist Party) and the architectural doctrines derived from the research of the Venice group. A trip to Bologna became a must for architecture and city planning students, architects, and decision makers of every stripe, on a par with an excursion to the new British cities. Publications on the subject piled up, 5 and critiques of the PCI's municipal policy emanating from the left w  he  lp  cs In Bolo experimet mad t possible or anon-reuctive uilfreerticulatin architecture and politics to be reformulated for French use, as Bernard Huet's remarks indicate:

T of this reversal, and daring to return decision-making power to neighborhood inhabitants. After Bologna, it can be said that the problem of safeguarding historical centers is no longer an aesthetic problem but a social and politicalo1

The case of Bologna thus bore witness to areconcilation o de-(as it had in the populist endeavors of the period immediately following 1968) and which also escaped from the vision of the architect as the single, willful creator of a space srippl:

In Bologna, the problem of urban growth has been linked to the territorial dimension of the region, just as the prervation  the histrical center is no more than a structural aspec  te overall city plan. Here, interventions based on centralized, technocratic plauning are demystified, and actual results calmly demonstrace how to invent and employ new tools and methods for effective operations benefting the inhabitants alone. In Bologna, even architects have become modest.18

## The Quest for Urban Architecture

The redisovery  the "modesty" prize by Huet wa accpanied by t whi weoer than thos  tog moholgy ppd less in their theoretical dimension than in their practical import. Thus the fascination f tBo exnt pro hey hehu ture opened up to the theme of urban architecture, both on the level of texts and of projects. The effects of an educational effort like that of Unité Pédagogique no. 8, for example, where a concern for the urban played a federating role during the founding years, could now reveal themselves fully, in combination with a better understanding of Italian authors and architects. A series of articles and fundamental inquiries proposed a vision of typology and morphology somewhat different from that of Carlo Aymonino and Aldo Rossi, though still based on their work. Architectural research allowed for the emergence of such analyses as "De l'lot à la barre, contribution à une définition de l'architecture urbaine," by Jean Castex, Philippe Panerai, and Jean-Charles Depaule, in 1975, 19 or Morphologie urbaine et typologie architecturale, by Ahmet Gülgönen, François Laisney, and their team, in 1977° The role of journals, however, was to prove essential in this debate. "Typologie de l'habitat et morphologie urbaine," an article published in 1974 by Christian Devillers, in the inaugural issue of L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui under the directorship of Bernard Huet, is the first attempt to set these two inseparable notions rigorously into place.²1 Indeed, this text takes on a programmatic value in what can be considered the turning point of French architectural culture. Not only did the idea of urbanity appear in this issue, but also echoes of the analysis of the historical failure of the avant-garde as studied by Tafuri and his Institute, evoked indirectly in the editorial by Bernard Huet:

For us, in 1974, remaining faithful to the spirit that presided over the creation of this journal means resuming the struggle begun by André Bloc some forty years ago. Of course, our struggle can no longer be stated in the same terms; it is not a question of fighting to defend some other form of modern architecture nostalgically attached to its origins, but rather of drawing the conclusions from the failure of the avant-garde, and discovering whether the preconditions of a contemporary architectural practice can now be stated clearly.22

A few years later, Devillers's analysis would be echoed in an article by Henri Raymond, who had been one of the first to familiarize himself with the Italian literature. Published in Communications, the article was an attempt to connect typological analysis with the work done by a French branch of urban sociology on the notion of the cultural model.³3 Raymond analyzed typology as a "structure of correspondence" between the spatial regularities of the project and the practices that the projected building would enclose. Both Raymond and Devillers shifted the emphasis of the Italian theorists by linking their ideas to the discourse of a certain type of social cince which ha mergein the French context.This shift serve cari apets o the original analysis:unlike the typological abstraction of the projects in the center oohi  ce h ave bee app whiViollt-eDuha ong r is nDe villers's and Raymond's consideration of the "practical/symbolic" dimension provided a glimpse into a wholly different way to introduce typology into work on projects.

For their part, Ahmet Gülgönen and François Laisney engaged in a much more literal reading of the Italian theories of typology and morphology, in accord with their intention to focus their research on the city and its space. They juxtaposed Italian studies to nineteenth-century French architectural theories from Durand to Guadet, but in the end contributed little more than a jumble of sometimes cloudy reflections on the question of the type. Rather than a fundamental development of operative ideas, their work was above all a preliminary exposé presenting three disparate fields of inquiry from which they drew few comparative conclusions: the recourse to Italian authors served more as a protective shield or screen than a solid frame of reference.²4

The analyses carried out by Devillers, who drew on the final paper he had written at Unité Pédagogique no. 8, as well as the studies of Raymond, Gülgönen, and Laisney, who taught in the same department, clearly demonstrate that the world of architectural education was the initial echo chamber for the Italian discourse (the work of Castex, Panerai, and Depaule would show the same). Even before the Italian theorists'ideas were relayed by the journals or the studies, they were cystallized in lecture courses and in pedagogical exercises that were unprecedented in the French tradition. This presence of the educational institution is witnessed by the publication of two term papers in the study by Gülgönen and Laisney. It explains the efforts these two authors made to combine the Italian reference with a reference to Louis Kahn, another primary source for the teaching at U.P. no. 8. It also explains Devillers's mix of references, both to the typology of Carlo Aymonino or Giorgio Grassi and to the sociological influences he had received.

## Bernard Huet and L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui

The impact of the Italian ideas appeared first in teaching; but the field of the press would prove no less decisive. In his fleeting attempt to give LArchitecture dAujourd'hui the content o a genuine architectural journal, in contrast to the strategy of he a logue pursued before and after him, Huet was not content simply to propagate a lifeless Italian culture, or merely to attract attention to urban experiments such as that of Bologna. Rather, it was with the direct and ongoing collaboration of Italian authors that Architecture d'Aujourdhui became, under his direction, an instrument for a kind of reintellectualization of French architectural culture. Indeed, almost fifteen years after the legendary period of Casabella Continuità, it was with the same signatures—Tafuri, or former assstants of Rogers such as Aldo Rossi—that Huet attained his successes. T h e y teing circles, was carried out as a direct exegesis of Italan culture: it was either exalted as a whole, as in the issue "Italie 75," or in one of its particular dimensions (industrial patronage) in the issue on "the Olivetti case."5

But there is more: beyond this reference to specific features of the Italian scene, which fascinated the members of the journal's editorial bord, a series of phenomena on the world architectural scene would be considered through gotti presentedhis reading oAlvaro Siza.Moreimportantly, Manredo Tafuri and the Venetian historians trained the spotlights on the problem of the skyscraper, cleariaway al tenological shortsihtedness,d the ture more broadly  the leading figures of the New York architectural scene, from gray to white: it was with the direct concourse of Tafuri that the New York Five appeared on the conceptual hi of Jefferson."28

It was not simply through the mix of historical and critical articles that the infuence of Italian culture could be felt in L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui. It was also present in the very problematics of some of Bernard Huet's editorials, especially those that moved away from institutional critique to focus on points of doctrine. In his text "Formalism-Realism," which opens an issue devoted to the exegesis of La Tendenza,Huet courageously attempted to articulate a position n Soviet ai tecture that overturned the common discourse on "formalism." To this end he adopted Aldo Rossi's positive judgment on the Stalinallee in East Berlin, and proclaimed the social import of work on architectural form which refuses the exclusive quest or rginality. No doubt it isuseful to stress why Huet' positon—which would soon earn him a chorus of reprimands³—was so courageous: it is because he conser an pn biu of socialist realism did not merit repression and exemption from any reflection on architecture and on the city, and that the relation between architecture and politics zUHu p tole Kopp and Claude Schnaidt, was built on indirect references to Rossi's ideas, to certain theorists of socialist realism, and to other authors such as the Czech critic Karel Teige, quoted from a very short text publishe in the journal Archithese. It was not the expression of a collective effort, as was the case for the polemics developed on the basis of the Italian Tendenza, but rather wás a somewhat fragile cultural position: it lacked an anchor in the French architectural debate, where no sustained discussion had ever dealt with the problematic of realism (so crucial in literature, cinema, and theater) and where the question of the relations between the vanguards of modern architecture had never been seriously explored. Huet's dizzying attempt to combine all these dimensions in condensed form could only provoke defensive reactions, which came, what is more, at the very moment when his tenure at L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui was drawing to a close. It remains nonetheless that the editorial invites a double process of "revision," to use one of Rogers's terms, in that it questions both the political pertinence of modern architecture and the formalism of socialist realism; this process of revision is still an incomplete project.

Paradoxically, it was in this same issue of L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui—marking at once the apogee and the abrupt end of Huet's experiment, whose Italophile dimension has been stressed-that Aldo Rossi chose to express his dismay at not being sufficiently heard, or loved, in France:

Unfortunately, my love for France is unrequited. Unless memory fails me, it was Stendhal who claimed that love has but a single disadvantage: it takes two to make it. In reality, I think that French culture, heir to a great tradition which is inseparable from the greatest cultural imperialism, is still closed in n itsel.This will surely be a difficult lov

## The Case of Architecture Mouvement Continuité

It is true that Rossi's positions would not be known in detail until the French translation of L'architettura della città in 1981. But another love story, seemingly more on the order of love at first sight than of Rossi's long seduction, had appeared with the relations that brought together the editorial boards ofArchitecture Mouvement Continuie, in Paris, and of Controspazio, which was in the process of moving from Milan to Rome. The idyll was to culminate in the parallel publication of a special issue of AMC on Italy and an issue of Controspazio on the French scene. 3

This initiative was already, in a way, an attempt to go beyond the first phase of Italophilia, as Olivier Girard indicates:

The special interest for Italy displayed over the last four or five years by certain fourth-r heu h sy utep more or less directly influenced by Italian publications, and by the emergence of debate and research around the theme of architectural typologies and urban morphology, which was paradoxiclly able to find its own field of enquiry, despite fifteen years of Italian speculations on the same sue, beus  therarytnslat textsuntil vy reently Itn e indispensble to understand in a more immediate way the Italian attempts to go beyond the modern movement.34

With this special issue, the second in a series dubbed L'autre, or "The Other"—a no doubt involuntary homage to the journal Das Andere, published in Vienna by Adolf Loos—-Girard drew on an aspect of Italian architectural culture to support his doctrinal line, in opposition to the ideas for which Huet had also summoned the Italians as character witnesses. Despite the static generated by a clumsy and rather approximate translation, it is possible to grasp the message sent out by Renato Nicolini and Alessandro Anselmi, who indicated the way to read the projects presented: both proposed a critique of the typo-morphological theories, either in the name of a struggle against the "new mannerism" (Nicolini) or the "positivism" of typology (Anselmi). And though the projects themselves included a few proposals issuing from the orbit of the University Institute of Architecture in Venice, they tended to shift the Italian references circulating in the French press toward an understanding of the research undertaken by several Roman teams on geometry and proportion, or on the large territorial scale.

## The Translations of Tafuri

The fertile season which saw the fowering of Italophilia in teaching, then aprolongation of these pedagogical positions in the press, would be followed by a season most fruitful in books.

The single work which so far had born witness to Italian debates in France, the translation of Saper vedere I'archittura, would gradually be complemented by more recent texts, though these were already dated and contested in Italy itself: for example, Leonardo Benevolo's Origine e sviluppo della citt moderna, published in 1972, at a date when the same author's Storia dell'architettura moderna had already been translated into German and English. But the real indicator marking the appearance of the source texts for the Italian debate was the French publication of Manfredo Tafuri's Theories and History of Architecture in 1976. This publication marked the high point of the activities of the SADG (Society of Architects holding Government Diplomas), which published the volume as part of a series of actions contributing to the emergence of a debate on architecture in France. It also marks in the clearest possible way the difficulty of introducing Tafuri's themes into the French context, as attested by the occasional dark spots in the translation, which add to the density of the author's concepts and references. These translation problems—actually very slight compared to those met by Tafuri in the United States, where Architecture and Utopia would literally be massacred—are an index of how strange the ideas in Theories and History were for the French public; for this was a book which situated the crisis of architecture in a littleknown historical and theoretical field. The publication was praised in such distant sites as the pages of Oppositions, where Yve-Alain Bois provided a user's guide to the book, indicating its full significance in the overcoming of the semiological discourse on architecture, while at the same time revealing the limits of Tafuri's ideas before certain architects such as Louis Kahn.35

It was precisey  nstrent r il redingture and its doctrines that Yve-Alain Bois analyzed Tafuri's writing, in its rhetorical excesses as well as its theoretical innovations. But it seems that this dimension of

Th nd Histoy was not cleary perceiv by  French readers, despieTafuri n efforts to indicate how it should be read:

Theoriesand History—at least in Italian culturewas the first book to draw parallels between the hiryrvanre tarary iure. Th i eu w pursuing two distinct aims. The first was to use the discipline as a means of testing its tools; the second followed on from the discovery that the discipline itself was rotten to the core. It wasn't so much that we were in crisis, but that all history had to be reassessed from the bottom up, to discover its theoretical foundations. We found—and personally speaking, I was appalled—that even those foundations were rotten to the core, as Piranesi said. It was no longer possible to move on with such foundations by backtracking. . . . This was true of the language of the avant-garde, the theoretical framework of architectural history and modern art history in general. . . . We were locked in a castle under a spell, the keys were lost, in a linguistic maze—the more we looked for a direction, the more we encountered magic halls full of tortured dreams. 36

The trip that the French reader would take, from this first text , er fantastical episodeadd o Sleepng Beauty:Tafurilehis readers to the disov ery of major themes in philosophy and aesthetics. The reference to Barthes, which some French professors had already brought to bear in the field of architecture, was complemented by the more central references to Benjamin and Adorno. The theme of architecture's loss of aura in the era of technical reproducibility thus came before the eyes of architects who, for the most part, had paid no attention to the French publication of Benjamin's texts. 38 Thus it was the detour through the Italian discourse that allowed, by the most twisted of possible paths, the introduction into the French debate of indispensable theoretical references, rendered inaccessible by the split between architectural discourse and the social sciences.

From the consideration of theories of urban architecture and the interest in restoration strategies for city centers to the discovery of entire fields of philosophical thought which could be more or less directly applied to architecture, the Italophile current and its production covered a vast range of territories.

## Blind Spots in the Italophile Gaze

The form of the window frame through which the Italian landscape was seen are not insignificant. This frame betrays the very contour of French architectural culture; it reveals the blockages of the French scene by its selection of themes from Italian culture. The relation to history, to theory, and to the urban that could be glimpsed in Italian architecture is exactly what the fashionable sociology and semiology of the early seventies had been unable to provoke in a French context dominated by a vision which reduced architecture to a "combinatory system" of more or less "proliferating" volumes, thought to be "innovative" by the simple force of their proliferation.

But though the Italophile gaze was able to seize a series of cultural movements on the Italian scene, thus uncovering the gaps in French architectural thinking, still the reverberations of this appropriation of Italian discourse were to prove very uneven. The introduction of Tafuri's discourse and the interest in Rossi's architecture, the evocation of typology or of the Bologna experiment would all play an undeniable role in the turn towards the rediscovery of history in architectural discourse, the reinvention of draftsmanship, the new attention to urban space, and the refusal of the mute singularity of the architectural object. More broadly, a certain taste, a certain pleasure of the text would appear. The references to Italy nourised the written productionrchitects and the production o ciical text on the sube of architecture, which came to know the joys of prose, and even more, of quotation.

But it would be inexact to claim that all the themes raised in the Italian debates crossed the border without difficulty. Take the case of urban architecture. The discourse on the historical centers and the techniques of architectural analysis and intervention were well integrated when it was a matter of considering urban centers and ensembles up to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but this was no longer true when the metropolitan dimension had to be taken into account: in reality, the exponents of urban architecture remained stuck with a rather static vision of the neoclassical city and the city during the early industrial revolution. Cacciari and Tafuri's analyses of the ideologies of the big city and their opposition to the antiurban discourse of the garden city movement did not come across, and the morpholoy of the garden cities irresistibly gained ground in the new cities of the Paris region. Thus in the end the new urban culture of French architects fixed upon the somewhat nostalgic vision of a city that had not attained metropolitan scale. The same incomprehension of the specific forms of growth of the twentieth-century city and the same disdain for the doctrines and techniques that can shape it, from its transformed center to its swollen peripheries, crops up again when one measures the echoes of the Venetian research into the question of the avant-garde. While all the Italian analyses pointed to the dead end met by avant-garde approaches and the failure of the attempt to rationalize social contradictions by means of architecture (even when architecture attempts to fit into an all-encompassing plan), the dominant discourse in France remains convinced of the idea of the totally positive nature of avant-garde construction in the interwar years. In particular, the tragic aspect of the experiments in Vienna and Weimar has not been truly grasped, even as their metropolitan dimension has been forgotten: the memory fixes visually on icons representing, at best, the neighborhood scale (the horseshoe of Berlin-Britz), and never on an entire urban structure-a trend in no way contradicted by those two great moments opulic fanfare, the "aris-Berlin" and "Paris-Moscowexhibitions at the Georges Pompidou Center. These events gave a chance to expose two cultural conjunctures in their totality, and yet in both cases, architecture was treated more in counterpoint to the artistic movements than in step with them as it really was, and as had already been proved in the case of Russia by the publication of texts by the Venetians in the journal VH 101.39 Another effect made patent by the two exhibitions is the way the tragic dimension of modern architecture's forced regression in Germany and the USS becomes themanifestation o blameworthy "orces o evil," but is in no wy ascribed to the very nature of the avant-garde, whose both Promethean and suicidal character is clear for anyone who takes the trouble to analyze the theoretical and critical production.

## Linguistic Contamination

For everything dealing with the metropolis as well as the temporal unfolding of twentieth-century architectural culture, and even for the very notion of the avantgarde, it seems that a very important part of the themes explored in Italian architectural culture have been and still are misunderstood—-even when some of the texts dealing with them have been translated, as is the case for Tafuri. Yet there is another field in which communication was exceptionally successful: that of the fixed formulas and linguistic tics borrowed from Italy, which soon would pepper a great many ae bookanr rts. Wha bet illurainheruu Italophile trend than this irruption of terms directly translated—or more precisely, transposed—from Italian? Rather than speaking of work on projects, or coining a prosaic term like projetage, French architects began to use the word projétation; work on urban form was no longer designated with the American term "urban design" but became a discipline called urbanistique; and we'll skip over the erroneous use of the word illuminisme, not for the theories of Böhme or Swedenborg, but to describe the

Enlightenment—just as we might bypass the use of strange abbreviations in bibliographies, like AA.VV. instead of Coll., to referenice multi-author works. No doubt the confusion is at its greatest around the question of typology. Indeed, typology is seen in many French texts from the late seventies not as a classificatory operation allowing for theolationdisict typ, utinstea   nym or henotion  t iven tyeidenti in urbn analysi becomes ue typologi remaquabl: he an exercise lends its name to the empirical object.

Let us simply consider this linguistic contamination as the trace p rurc  enc rictre ws   p8mnig  e jargon it had borrowed from the Ecole des Beau-Arts.

The most recent episodes in the chronicle of Franco-Italian relations have taken on a dimension at once more public and more polemical. The activities of the Institut Italien de Culture had regularly included architectural themes since it exhibition of the architecture of rationalism in 177but a great deal more public attention was raised by the presentation in the 1981 Festival d'Automne of an exhibition organized by Paolo Portoghesi for the Venice Biennial in 1980, under the banner of The Presence of the Past.

Curiously, it was through a cultural project inspired by an AcF r y o sian architects.

The confusion introduced by the foggy discourse of the exhibition organizers was not dissipated by the belated echoes it found in the press. Thus the idea of post-modernism was definitively linked to the world of architecture, as witnessed by the cluster of texts in the first issue of the journal Babylone, published in 1983.41

A year after the spotlights had been trained on Portoghesi's machinations, the major voice of the opposition to the 1980 Venice Biennial, Vittorio Gregotti—himself the organizer of the liess equivocal but less showy exhibition of architecture at the 1976 Biennial—was presented to the French public in his turn. Gregotti, the author in 1980 of a vehement article against The Presence of the Past,42 was thus thrown into the ring at the very moment when the question of the 1989 Exposition Universelle was being debated in Paris. Among the groups preparing that event, he would associate himself with Renzo Piano, Antoine Grumbach, and other consultants such as Pontus Hulten.

The presence of both Gregotti and Piano in Paris, at the moment when Gae Aulenti had been called to work on the Orsay museum, should be understood in its full significance. No doubt Gregotti was not exempt from a fascination for the supposed capacities of the French technocracy to launch huge, exalting projects. But this presence was also a kind of just deserts for an architectural culture that had been able to assimilate teachings lost for French architecture itself: the lessons of Auguste Perret, for Gregotti r Jean Prouvé, for Piano Thus one o the major drections in nodern French architecture was reopened through the choice of these men, whosclturehelpehem cra highly pere the pt.

It can be useful to linger over the reasons for this strange return of a part of the potential contained in the ideas and forms of twentieth-century French architecture, which has come back via Italy to take on a timeliness that it would not have had without this foreign contribution. Nor is it superfluous to inquire into the reasons that authorized the reexportation to France of theoretical and philosophical discourses which had first come to light here, but which remained outside the field of architecture, because of the split between architects and intellectuals.

Alongside causes external to the field of architecture, such as the solidarity of the generations that had emerged from the struggle against fascism, or the importance of regional poles stimulating the creation of journals and of autonomous, competitive forums of debate, the analysis of trends in the Italian architectural culture of the postwar period has shown the important role played by the educational system, research, and the professional press in the establishment of basic references.

The constitution of meeting places between architects and intellectuals, both real and virtual, is among the phenomena emerging today in France, of which the growing interest for architecture in the press is both an effect and an instrument. The interest that certain intellectuals, philosophers in particular, have shown for architecture—which is quite different from the way that sociologists from the field of housing intervened some twenty years ago—bears witness to these new encounters.

But such meetings may well remain exceedingly fragile, so long as intellectual production in the field of architecture itself is not grounded in an institutional system allowing professors, researchers, and critics to engage in an activity with some stability. In this sense, the institutional dimensions of architectural policy are fundamental, whether it be a matter of doctoral programs allowing for a veritable intellectual investment from young researchers and opening up courses to researchers from other disciplines than architecture, or of recruiting and promoting professors who accord culture and theory their full due. The mix of an obligation to publish and the institution of publishing grants in the framework of a public policy carried out at a national level is therefore indispensable, especially since the historical heritage of centralization does not permit us to imagine the appearance, in the near future, of those regional poles whose importance is so great in Italy.

The resources of living memory lead us inevitably to a reflection on the institutional problems of today's architectural culture. But these problems can only be fully grasped when one keeps in sight the ways in which the activity of the achitectural projc as reonstittse beneath the mpac the movements analyzed above.

## Notes

(Paris: Ministère des Affaires Culturelles, 1970), p. 14.

To perceive this impact it suffices to analyze certain projects carried out by Paul Chemetov in the early 1970s, such as the housing projects in Romainville, Saint-Ouen, and Vienne.

Marcel Pote, Introduction àl'urbanisme (Paris: Anthropos, 1967), preface by Hubert Tonka. Ttebl far from Pote, as he admits in his introduction.

z V é Cie, 1967).

MIT Press, 1982), p. 141144 (Halbwachs), p.101 (Lévi-Strauss).

G hab pe  . 3134.

en I'honneur de Pierre Lavedan (Paris: Henri Laurens, 1954), pp. 341346; Max Sorre, Rencontres

i Hru; Frec transatinThéore  histre derchitectre PariEdions SADG.1976.

9. H éue"c py u (Paris: Institut de l'Environnement-Cedra, 1975).

10.Cf. in particular one of the most seminal: Blandine Barret-Kriegel, François Béguin, Bruo Fortier, Daniel Friemann, andAlain Montchablon, La politique eespace parisn ala fn de I'Ancien Régime) (Paris: Corda, 1975).

Franco Bella, "Una tomba per Edipo,"Aut Aut 14 197.

D'Acierno and Robert Connolly (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987).

C. the parallel undertakings by different publishers: Antonio Gramsci, Ecrits politiques, 2 vols., trans. and preface by Robert Paris (Paris: Gallimard, 19741975); Gramsci dans le texte, anthology edited by François Ricci and Jean Bramant (Paris: Editions Sociales, 1975). Al  he jl b pl  te PCI "Révoluions d'Itale,"Esprit, November 197; "L'Italt nous,"Diaectiqus1819 976 (Paris:Aubier-Montaigne, 1976);Marcelle Padovani, La longue marche du P.C. Italien y  t, 1977), etc.

Chritie Buci-Glüksman, Gramsci e'Etat (ParisFayar 1975).

ing the effort, one authored by it principle protagonist, Pierluigi Cervelti: Lanouvell culture des villes (Paris: Seuil, 1980).

arMicheMarVentur " tec  Blo PCI   b,"ar

eHu "  ut,"hu 180 (July-August 1975), p. 3.

18. Ibid., p. 44.

Jean Castex, Jean-Charles Depaule, and Philippe Panerai, Formes urbaines: de l'ilôt à la barre (Paris: Dunod, 1977).

hme Gülönennd Frans LisercviorMorhoogibaie t typo chitecturale (Paris: IERAU/Corda, 1977)

Christian Devillers, "Typologie de l'habitat et morphologie urbaine," in "Recherche habitat," Architecture d'Aujourd'hui 174 (July-August 1974), pp. 18—22. Also see a site study based on the same positions: Christian Devillers, Bernard Huet, Le Creusot, naissance et developpement d'une ville industrielle 17821914 (Champ Vallon: Seyssel, 1981).

Bernard Huet, editorial, Architecture d'Aujourd'hui 174 (July—August 1974), p.vii.

23.Henri Raymond, "Commuter et transmuter: la sémiologie de l'architecture," in "Sémiotique de l'espace," Communications 27 (1977), pp. 103111. This and other articles by Raymond have been reprinted in an anthology which bears the mark of Italian influence: Henri Raymond, Larchitecture: Les aventures spatiales de la raison (Paris: Centre de Création Industrielle, Centre Georges Pompidou, 1984).

Gülgönen and Laisney, Morphologie urhaine et typologie architecturale. The three concrete studies deal with Saint-Denis (Jean-Claude Delorme and Jean-Paul Scalabre), the HBM and the ceinture de Paris (Jean-François Chiffard and Jean-Claude Delorme), and Nancy (François Laisney and Martine Piétu).

Issue ti "Politiue industrielleet architecure:le cs Olivett,"Architecure d'ujurdu 188 (December 1976).

Vitt reot "L asslvSi,inortal,rchuu (May—June 1976), p. 42.

Vie et mort du gratte-ciel,"Architecture d'Aujurd'hui 178 (March-April 1975).

28Manfredo Tafuri, "Les cendres de Jefferson," in "New York in White & Gray," Architecture d'Aujourd'hui 186 (August-September 1976), pp. 5358; trans. as "The Ashes of Jefferson," in The Sphere and the Labyrinth.

BernardHuet "Formalisme-éalisme,"Architecture dAujourd'hui 190 April 177pp. 3536; translated in this volume.

Cf. the responses to the above-quoted editorial by Paul Chemetov, Anatole Koop, and Claude Schnaidt (under the title "Bernard Huet entre le rationalisme et le kitsch stalinien") and by Bruno Queysanne, as well as the single letter of support from Giorgio Grassianthe cariaton y BrarHuet, "Le tems de alentus,"Architu s ment," Architecture 403 (June 1977), pp. 6869.

31. Karel Teige, "Realismus und Formalismus," in "Réalisme," Archithese 19 (1976), pp. 49- 50. This text is a short excerpt of a long manuscript on the question of socialist realism, written by Teige shortly before his suicide.

32. Aldo Rossi, interview in "Formalisme-réalisme."

L'utre,"special issue Architecture Mouvement Continui3 February 1975"Nuove chitetture nFrancia,"specialissueControspazio(anuary-February176.

34.Olivier Gérard, in Architecture Mouvement Continuité 2-3 (February 1975), p. 2.

Yve-Alain Bois, "On Manfredo Tafuri's Théories et histoire de l'architecture," Oppositions 11 (Winter 1977), pp. 118123.

3Manfredo Tafuri, interview with Françoise Véry, Architecture Mouvement Continuité 39 (une 1976), p.6; English translation inCasabella619620 (January-February1995),pp. 3747.

ManfredTafuri Projet utopie aris:Dunod,17;original Italianedition,Progettot (Bari: Laterza, 1973); English edition Architecture and Utopia, trans. Barbara Luigia La Penta (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1976).

8Walter Benjamin, Mythe et violence, poésie et révolution (Paris: Denoël, 1971). For the French bibliography on Walter Benjamin, see "Walter Benjamin," Revue d'Esthétique, n.s. 1 (1981), pp. 177-178.

Giorgio Ciucci, Francesco Dal Co, Mario Manieri-Elia, and Manfredo Tafuri, "L'architecture et l'avant-garde artistique en URSS de 1917 à 1934," VH 101, no. 78 (1972).

Sor example, theevnts anize n18 the theme museu archtecue and specifically on Carlo Scarpa's work in Verona: Luciana Miotto, ed., Carlo Scarpa et l musée d Verone (Paris: Institut Italien de Culture, 1983). Also see, as testimony of the official service reports concerning urban policy, the issue of Paris-projet devoted to the two capitals: "Paris-Rome—Protection t mise e valeur du patrimoine architectural," Paris-projet 23\~24 (1983).

41.Babylone 1 (Winter 1982-1983).

Vitrio Greot, "Ivecchietti ellecolonne,"LRepubbica, ugust 80

<table><tr><td>1984</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Peter Eisenman</td><td>&quot;The End of the Classical: The End of the Beginning, the End of the End&quot; Perspecta 21 (1984)</td></tr><tr><td>see Eisenman (236239) |</td><td>In architectural projects as well as writings, Peter Eisenman has tirelessly sought a space for architecture outside the traditional parameters of the sensuous and the built, concerning himself instead with what may properly be called a conceptual archi- tecture —one that seeks through an aesthetic withdrawal to replace the built object with a diagram of its formative procedures, isolating and elaborating the architectural elements and operations that would resist all encircling determinants of architectural form. &quot;The End of the Classical: The End of the Beginning, the End of the End&quot; cannot be separated from the endgames of Eisenman&#x27;s House X (1975), House El Even Odd (198o), and the project for the Cannaregio district in Venice (1978). In Eisenman&#x27;s view, modern architecture was never fully mod- ern. Though it did produce a certain opacity of the architectural sign (most often referred to as its abstractness), modern architecture was never really free of the bur- den to mean; the referent still survives, albeit problematically, in cherished modernist emblems like the industrial shed, grain silo, and steamship, their workmanlike mate- rials, and their social utility. Though it sought to reprogram our perceptual habits, modern architecture did not produce a cognitive reflection about the nature of archi- tecture on a fundamental level (which Eisenman seems to see as a kind of universal grammar of form, available for elaboration and transgression). For Eisenman to stig- matize this crisis of and commitment to representation as classical or humanist is to characterize modernism as ideological and underscore the way in which its vision of architectural form and its potentials, as well as the possibilities of form&#x27;s fictional status, remained an anthropological one.</td></tr><tr><td>I compare 566-567</td><td>An anti-anthropological, anti-humanist architecture must man- age the conflict between the need for a systematic, verifiable geometry and the desire for a random organization of form (which Eisenman calls decomposition). And the only available figure of thought that can hold these oppositions of &quot;timeless,&quot; &quot;non- representational,&quot; &quot;artificial&quot; architecture together is the text—a tissue, textile, or texture of referral and delay in which there is neither beginning nor end. Now, whether Eisenman&#x27;s conceptual architecture, with its textualization of every domain of the practice—the site as text, the program as text, the body as text —is a redemptive detour out of reification (the identification of a possible critical vocation for the tissue of fragmented, floating, reified signs) or a postmodern flattening of architecture&#x27;s ma- terial and historical dimensions is, perhaps, not so much a dilemma of alternatives as a paradox that cannot be escaped: the historical paradox of an era of postsignifi- cation, in which Eisenman&#x27;s work is fully immersed. In a 1979 essay on Aldo Rossi, Eisenman had already character- ized the exigent program for present-day architecture as one of reckoning with postsignification: The problem [we face now is] choosing between an anachronistic continuance of hope and an acceptance of the bare conditions of survival. . . Incapable of believing in reason, uncertain of the significance of his objects, man [has lost] his capacity for signifying. . .. The context which gave ideas and objects their previous significance is gone. . .. The [modernist proposal of the]</td></tr></table>

lly y appear to have meaning but they speak into a void of history. The realization of this void, at cua  u Tohaveeang both jet and eust nowlegeanmolize hisne ly.

We must signify the fact that we can no longer signify; Eisenman generalizes the present historical condition of loss and anticipates an architecture exasperated byhe desire to mean and forced into an apocalyptic becoming aware of loss—a state charged by a residual tension of minimal difference between signifying something and signifying that signification is henceforth impossible.

## Notes

In an early essay that seeks a definition of conceptual architecture, Eisenman writes: "A conceptual structure is that aspect of the visible form, whether it is an idea, in a drawing, or in a building, which is intentionally put in the form to provide access to the inner form or universal formal relationships. . . . In order to approximate a conceptual intention, the shapes which are perceived would have to contain a structure within their physical presence which would have the capacity to take the viewer from the sense (immediate) perception to a conceptual attitude, and at the same time requiring of this structure a capacity to suppress the possible primacy of a sensual response." "Notes on Conceptual Architecture: Towards a Definition," Design Quarterly 78/79 (197o), pp. 15.

2. Peter Eisenman, introduction to Aldo Rossi in America, 1976 to 1979, ed. Kenneth Frampton (New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, 1979), p. 3; my emphasis.

Architecture from the fifteenth century to the present has been under the influence of three "fictions." Notwithstanding the apparent succession of architectural styles, each with its own label—classicism, neoclassicism, romanticism, modernism, postmodernism, and so on into the future—these three fictions have persisted in one form or another for five hundred years. They are representation, reason, and history.' Each of the fictions had an underlying purpose: representation was to embody the idea of meaning; reason was to codify the idea of truth; history was to recover the idea of the timeless from the idea of change. Because of the persistence of these categories, it will be necessary to consider this period as manifesting a continuity in architectural thought. This continuous mode of thought can be referred to as the classical.2

It was not until the late twentieth century that the classical could be appreciated as an abstract system of relations. Such recognition occurred because the architecture of the early part of the twentieth century itself came to be considered part of history. Thus it is now possible to see that, although stylistically different from previous architectures, "modern" architecture exhibits a system of relations similar to the classical.³ Prior to this time, the "classical" was taken to be either synonymous with "architecture" conceived of as a continuous tradition from antiquity or, by the mid-nineteenth century, an historicized style. Today the period of time dominated by the classical can be seen as an "episteme," to employ Foucault's term—a continuous period of knowledge that includes the early twentieth century.4 Despite the proclaimed rupture in both ideology and style associated with the modern movement, the three fictions have never been questioned and so remain intact. This is to say that architecture since the mid-fifteenth century aspired to be a paradigm of the classic, of that which is timeless, meaningful, and true. In the sense that architecture attempts to recover that which is classic, it can be called "classical."5

## The "Fiction" of Representation: The Simulation of Meaning

The first "iction" is representation. Before the Renaissance there was a congruence olag n epreentoThemean ngge was  e conveyed within representation; in other words, the way language produced meaning could be represented within language. Things were; truth and meaning were selfevident. The meaning of a Romanesque or gothic cathedral was in itself; it was de facto. Renaissance buildings, on the other hand—and all buildings after them that pretended to be "architecture"—received their value by representing an aready tiqu buildings; they were e jure.The message of the past was used to veriy the meaning of the present. Precisely because of this need to veriy, Renaissance architecture was the first simulation, an unwitting fiction of the object.

By the t hen cntuyisrcalelativiy cme prompted a search forcertainty, for rigins both historical and logical, forru and proof, and for goals. Truth was no longer thought to reside in representation but was believed to exist outside it, in the processes of history. This shift can be seen in the changing status of the orders; until the seventeenth century they were thought to be paradigmatic and timeless; afterwards the possibility of their timeoccurred because language had ceased to intersect with representation—that is, becau it wasot meai bmessage at w playenhe.

Modern architecture claimed to rectify and liberate itself from theR    o architecture to represent another architecture; architecture was solely to embody its own function. With the deductive conclusion that form follows function, modern architecture introduced the idea that a building should express—that is, look likeits function, or like an idea of function (that it should manifest the rationality of its processes of production and composition). Thus, in its effort to distance itself from the earlier representational tradition, modern architecture attempted to strip itself of the outward trappings of "classical" style. This process of reduction was called abstraction. A column without a base and capital was thought to be an abstraction. Thus reduced, form was believed to embody function more honestly. Such a column looked more like a real column, the simplest possible load-carrying element, than one provided with a base and capital bearing arboreal or anthropomorphic motifs.

This reduction to pure functionality was, in fact, not abstraction; it was an attempt to represent reality itself. In this sense functional goals merely replaced the orders of classical composition as the starting point for architectural design. The moderns' attempt to represent "realism" with an undecorated, functional object was a fiction equivalent to the simulacrum of the classical in Renaissance representation. For what made function any more "real" a source of imagery than elements chosen from antiquity? The idea of function, in this case the message of utility as opposed to the message of antiquity, was raised to an originary proposition—a self-evident starting point for design analogous to typology or historical quotation. The moderns' attempt to represent realism is, then, a manifestation of the same fiction wherein meaning and value reside outside the world of an architecture "as is," in which representation is about its own meaning rather than being a message of another previous meaning.

Functionalism turned out to be yet another stylistic conclusion, this one based on a scientific and technical positivism, a simulation of efficiency. From this perspective the modern movement can be seen to be continuous with the architecture that preceded it. Modern architecture therefore failed to embody a new value in itself. For in trying to reduce architectural form to its essence, to a pure reality, the moderns assumed they were transforming the feld of referential figuration to that of non-referential "objectivity." In reality, however, their "objective" forms never left the classical tradition. They were simply stripped down classical forms, or forms referring to a new set of givens (function, technology). Thus, Le Corbusier's houses that look like modern steamships or biplanes exhibit the same referential atitude toward representation as a Renaissance or"classical" building. The points of reference are different, but the implications for the object are the same.

The commitment to return modernist abstraction to history seems to sum up, for our time, the problem of representation. It was given its "Post-Modern" inversion in Robert Venturi's distinction between the "duck" and the "decorated shed."8 A duck is a building that looks like its function or that allows its internal order to be displayed on its exterior; a decorated shed is a building that functions as a billboard, where any kind of imagery (except its internal function)- letters, patterns, even architectural elements——conveys a message accessible to all. In this sense the stripped-down "abstractions" of modernism are still referential objects: technological rather than typological ducks.

But the Post-Modernists fail to make another distinction which is exemplified in Venturi's comparison of the Doges' Palace in Venice, which he calls a decorated shed, and Sansovino's library across the Piazza San Marco, which he says is a duck. This obscures the more significant distinction between architecture "as is" and architecture as message. The Doges' Palace is not a decorated shed because it was not representational of another architecture: its significance came directly from the meaning embodied in the figures themselves; it was an architecture "as is." Sansovino's library may seem to be a duck, but only because it falls into the history of library types. The use of the orders on Sansovino's library speaks not to the function or type of the library, but rather to the representation of a previous architecture. The facades of Sansovino's library contain a message, not an inherent meaning; they are sign boards. Venturi's misreading of these buildings seems motivated by a preference for the decorated shed. While the replication of the orders had significance in Sansovino's time (in that they defined the classical), the replication of the same orders today has no significance because the value system represenited is no longer valued. A sign begins to replicate or, in Jean Baudrillard's term, "simulate," once the reality it represents is dead. When there is no longer a distinction between representation and reality, when reality is only simulation, then representation loses its a priori source of significance, and it, too, becomes a simulation.

## The "Fiction" of Reason: The Simulation of Truth

The second "fiction" of postmedieval architecture is reason. If representation was a simulation of the meaning of the present through the message of antiquity, then reason was a simulation of the meaning of the truth through the message of science. This fiction is strongly manifest in twentieth-century architecture, as it is in that o the four preceding centuries; its apogee was in the Enlightenment. The quest for o inrchitecture isthe initial manfestationthe pation towar ral srcr esBefore heRena h erg ws seen s elen; imenganr "et wiout syig; bele o   pri l origins were sought innatural or divine sources or in a cosmological or anthropomorpicgeomery Thereproduction o the imag o the Vitruvian man is the most renowned example. Not surprisingly, since the origin was thought to contain the see of the object's purpose and thus its destination, this beliefin the existence of an ideal origin led directly to a belief in the existence of an ideal end. Such a genetic idea of beginning/end depended on a belief in a universal plan in nature and the cosmos which, through the application of classical rules of composition concerning hierarchy, order, and closure, would confer a harmony of the whole upon the parts.

The perspective of the end thus drected the strategy for beginning. Therefore, as A process oftransformation, butrather a strategyfor arriving at  predetermineoal; it was the mechanism by which the idea of order, represented in the orders, was translated into a specficform"Reacting against the cosmological goals of Renaissance composition, Enlightenment architecture aspired to a rational process of design whose ends were a product of pure, secular reason rather than of divine order. The Renaissance vision of harmony (faith in the divine) led naturally to the scheme of order that was to replace it (faith in reason), which was the logical determination of form from a priori types.

Durand embodies this moment of the supreme authority of reason. In his treatises formal orders become type forms, and natural and divine origins are replaced by rational solutions to the problems of accommodation and construction. Thes scly "eleatariture; itis atti trg thera transformation of type forms. Later, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, function and technique replaced the catalogue of type forms as origins. But the point is that from Durand on, it was believed that deductive reason-—the same process used in science, mathematics, and technology—was capable of producing a truthful (that is, meaningful) architectural object. And with the success of rationalism as a scientific method (one could almost call it a "style" of thought) in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, architecture adopted the self-evident values conferred by rational origins. If an architecture looked rational—that is, represented rationality—it was believed to represent truth. As in logic, at the point where all deductions developed from an initial premise corroborate that premise, there is logical closure and, it was believed, certain truth. Moreover, in this procedure the primacy of the origin remains intact. The rational became the moral and aesthetic basis of modern architecture. And the representational task of architecture in an age of reason was to portray its own modes of knowing.

At this point in the evolution of consciousness something occurred: reason turned its focus onto itself and thus began the process of its own undoing. Questioning its own status and mode of knowing, reason exposed itself to be a fiction.1²2 The processes for knowing--measurement, logical proof, causality turned out to be a network of value-laden arguments, no more than effective modes of persuasion. Values were dependent on another teleology, another end fiction, that of rationality. Essentially, then, nothing had really changed from the Renaissance idea of origin. Whether the appeal was to a divine or natural order, as in the fifteenth century, or to a rational technique and typological function, as in the post-Enlightenment period, it ultimately amounted to the same thing—-to the idea that architecture's value derived from a source outside itself. Function and type were only value-laden origins equivalent to divine or natural ones.

In this second "fiction" the crisis of belief in reason eventually undermined the power of self-evidence. As reason began to turn on itself, to question its own status, its authority to convey truths, its power to prove, began to evaporate. The analysis of analysis revealed that logic could not do what reason had claimed for it—reveal the self-evident truth of its origins. What both the Renaissance and the modern relied on as the basis of truth was found to require, in essence, faith. Analysis was a form of simulation; knowledge was a new religion. Similarly, it can be seen that architecture never embodied reason; it could only state the desire to do so; there is no architectural image of reason. Architecture presented an aesthetic of the experiec of (the persuasiveness of and desire for) reason. Analysis, and the illusion of proof in acontinuous process that recalls Nietzsches characterization of "truth," is a never-ending series of figures, metaphors, and metonymies.

In a cognitive environment in which reason has been revealed to depend on a belief — — for this transformation, nor how ingeniously the transformation is.

Architectural restatement, replication, is a nostalgia for the security of knowing, a belief in the continuing of Western thought. Once analysis and reason replaced self-evidence as the means by which truth was revealed, the classic or timeless quality of truth ended and the need for verification began.

## The "Fiction" of History: The Simulation of the Timeless

The third "fiction" of classical Western architecture is that of history. Prior to the mid-fifteenth century, time was conceived nondialectically; from antiquity to the Middle Ages there was no concept of the "forward movement" of time. Art did not seek its justification in terms of the past or future; it was ineffable and timeless. In ancient Greece the temple and the god were one and the same; architecture was divine and natural. For this reason it appeared "classic" to the Classical epoch that followed. The classic could not be represented or simulated, it could only be. In its straightforward assertion of itself it was nondialectical and timeless.

In the mid-fifteenth century the idea of a temporal origin emerged, and with it the idea of the past. This interrupted the eternal cycle of time by positing a fixed point of beginning. Hence the loss of the timeless, for the existence of origin required a temporal reality. The attempt of the classical to recover the timeless turned, paradoxically, to a time-bound concept of history as a source of timelessness. Moreover, the consciousness of time's forward movement came to "explain" a process of historical change. By the nineteenth century this process was seen as "dialectical." With dialectical time came the idea of the zeitgeist, with cause and effect rooted in presentness—that is, with an aspired-to timelessness of the present. In adition to its aspiration to timelessness, thespirit of the age" held that an a prior relationship existed between history and all its manifestations at any given moment. It was necessary only to identify the governing spirit to know what style of architecture was properly expressive of, and relevant to, the time. Implicit was the notion that man should always be "in harmony"—or at least in a non-disjunctive relation— with his time.

In its polemical rejection of the history that preceded it, the modern movement attempted to appeal to values for this (harmonic) relationship oher than those that embodie the eternal r universal. In seeing itsel as superseding the values of the preceding architecture, the modern movement substituted a universal idea of relevance for a universal idea of history, analysis of program for analysis of history. It presumed itself to be a value-free and collective form of intervention, as opposed to the virtuoso individualism and informed connoisseurship personified by the post-Renaissance architect. Relevance in modern architecture came tolein embodying a value other than he natural or divine; the zeitgeist was s  e cnt he pre rat than  sout eal ute difference in value between presentness and the universal—between the contingent value of the zeitgeist and the eternal value of the classical—only resulted in yet another set (in fact, simply the opposite set) of aesthetic preferences. The presumably neutral spirit of the "epochal will" supported asymmetry over symmetry, dynamism

The imperatives of the "historical moment" are always evident in the connection between the representation of the function of architecture and its form. Ironically, modern architecture, by invoking the zeitgeist rather than doing aw w hiy ycn  eiw iscally form." In this sense modern architecture was not a rupture with history, but simply a moment in the samé continuum, a new episode in the evolution of the zeitgeist. And architecture's representation of its particular zeitgeist turned out to be less "modern" than originally thought.

One of the questions that may be asked is why the moderns did bound them to their present history with the promise to release them from their past

The late twentieth century, with its retrospective knowledge that modernism has becme history, has inheritednothing le than the recogniion as timeless.The lusory tmelessness f the present brings with t n wareness the e atu  p m It i  h  hat hena zt a p uation;s e  eassial u cti  p T there will always be this unacknowledged paradox, a simulation of the timeless through a replication of the timeful.

Zeitgeist history, too, is subject to a questioning of its own authority. How can it be possible, from within history, to determine a timeless truth of its "spirit?"Thus history ceases to be an objective source of truth; origins and ends once again lose their universality (that is, their self-evident value) and, like history, become fictions. If it is no longer possible to pose the problem of architecture in terms of a zeitgeist—-that is if architecture can no longer assert its relevance through a consonance with its zeitgeist—then it must turn to some other structure. To escape such a dependence on the zeitgeist—-that is, the idea that the purpose of an architectural style is to embody the spirit of its age—it is necessary to propose an alternative idea of architecture, one whereby it is no longer the purpose of architecture, but its inevitability, to express its own time.

Once the traditional values of classical architecture are understood as not meaningful, true, and timeless, it must be concluded that these classical values were always simulations (and are not merely seen to be so in light of a present rupture of history or the present disillusionment with the zeitgeist). It becomes clear that the classical itself was a simulation that architecture sustained for five hundred years. Because the classical did not recognize itself as a simulation, it sought to represent extrinsic values (which it could not do) in the guise of its own reality.

The result, then, of seeing classicism and modernism as part of a single historical continuity is the understanding that there are no longer any selfevident values in representation, reason, or history to confer legitimacy on the object. This loss of self-evident value allows the timeless to be cut free from the meaningful and the truthful. It permits the view that there is no one truth (a timeless truth), or one meaning (a timeless meaning), but merely the timeless. When the possibility is raised that the timeless can be cut adrift from the timeful (history), so too can the timeless be cut away from universality to produce a timelessness which is not universal. This separation makes it unimportant whether origins are natural or divine or functional; thus, it is no longer necessary to produce a classic—that is, a timeless—architecture by recourse to the classical values inherent in representation, reason, and history.

## The Not-classical: Architecture as Fiction

The necessity of the quotation marks around the term "fiction" is now obvious. The three fictions just discussed can be seen not as fictions but rather as simulations. As has been said, fiction becomes simulation when it does not recognize its condition as fiction, when it tries to simulate a condition of reality, truth, or non-fiction. The simulation of representation in architecture has led, first of all, to an excessive concentration of inventive energies in the representational object. When columns are seen as surrogates of trees and windows resemble the portholes of ships, architectural elements become representational figures carrying an inordinate burden of meaning. In other disciplines representation is not the only purpose of figuration. In literature, for example, metaphors and similes have a wider range of application--poetic, ironic, and the like--and are not limited to allegorical or referential functions. Conversely, in architecture only one aspect of the figure is traditionally at work: object representation. The architectural figure always alludes to-—aims at the representation of—some other object, whether architectural, anthropomorphic, natural, or technological.

Second, the simulation of reason in architecture has been based on a classical value given to the idea of truth. But Heidegger has noted that error has a trajectory parallel to truth, that error can be the unfolding of truth.'3 Thus to proceed from "error" or fiction is to counter consciously the tradition of "mis-reading" on which the classical unwittingly depended—not a presumably logical transformation of something a priori, but a deliberate "error" stated as such, one which presupposes only its own internal truth, Error in this case does not assume the same value as truth; it is not simply its dialectical opposite. It is more like a dissimulation, a "notcontaining" of the value of truth.

Finally, the simulated fiction of modern movement history, unwittingly inherited from the classical, was that any present-day architecture must be a reflection of its zeitgeist: that is, architecture can simultaneously be about presentness and universality. But if architecture is inevitably about the invention of fictions, it should also be possible to propose an architecture that embodies an other fiction, one that is not sustained by the values of presentness or universality and, more importantly, that does not consider its purpose to reflect these values. This other fiction/ object, then, clearly should eschew the fictions of the classical (representation, reason, and history), which are attempts to "solve" the problem of architecture rationally; for strategies and solutions are vestiges of a goal-oriented view of the world. If this is the case, the question becomes: What can be the model for architecture when the essence of what was effective in the classical model—the presumed rational value of structures, representations, methodologies of origins and ends, and deductive processes—has been shown to be a simulation?

It is not possible to answer such a question with an alternative mo ut  serhartic cn  proo taty is por, thioss in our capacity to conceptualize a new model for architecture. These characteristics, ouined below, arise from that which can not be; they form a structure of absences. The purpose in proposing them is not to reconstitute what has just been dismissed, a model for a theory of architecture—for ll such models are ultimately futile. Rather what is being proposed is an expansion beyond the limitations presented by the claslmlzueur — the timeless in the artificial.

Themeaningreebirary,and timeles ceation rticality in this sense must be distinguished from what Baudrillard has called "simulation:"1s it is not an attempt to erase the classical distinction between reality and representation-—thus again making architecture a set of conventions simulating the real; it is, rather, more k adismulation.Whereas simulation attepts blitera the difference between real and imaginary, dissimulation leaves untouched the difference l similar the ificaton mbodi n the mask: the   pretending to eo what one is—that is, a sign which seems not to signify anything besides itself (the ur   in the provisial theo-caicas ssiulai   e otoassl inverse, negative, or opposite of classical architecture; it is merely different from or other than. A "not-classical" architecture is no longer a certification of experience or a simulation of history, reason, or reality in the present. Instead, it may more approp n It is ataionel vlntel p.

The claim that a "not-classical"architecture is necessary, tat it is proposed by the new epoch or the rupture in the continuity of history, would noe i nt.asslmeel pr dominance of classical values in order to reveal other values. It proposes, not a new value or a new zeitgeist, but merely another condition—one of reading architecture xt.Teris everheless o questn tat hih eadihit nificant and have become no more than replications. A not-classical architecture is, therefore, not unresponsive to the realization of the closure inherent in the world: rather, it is unresponsive to representing it.

## The End of the Beginning

An origin of value implies a state or a condition of origin before value has been given to it. A beginning is such a condition prior to a valued origin. In order to reconstruct time-bound concepts of the classical, which are primarily origin and end. The end of the beginning is also the end of the beginning of value. But it is not possible to go back to the earlier, prehistoric state of grace, the Eden of timelessness before origins and ends were valued. We must begn in the present without necessarily iving a value to presentness. The attempt to reconstruct the timeless today must be a fiction which recognizes the fictionality of its own task—that is, it should not attempt to simulate a timeless reality.

As has been suggested above, latent in the classical appeal to origins is the more general problem of cause and effect. This formula, part of the fictions of reason and history, reduces architecture to an "added to" or "inessential object by making it simply an effect of certain causes understood as origins. This problem is inherent in all of classical architectures including its modernist aspect. The idea of architecture as something "added to" rather than something with its own being—as adjectival rather than nominal or ontological—leads to the perception of architecture as a practical device. As long as architecture is primarily a device designated for use and for shelter-that is, as long as it has origins in programmatic functions—it will always constitute an effect.

But once this "self-evident" characteristic of architecture is dismissed and architecture is seen as having no a priori origins--whether functional, divine, or natural—alternative fictions for the origin can be proposed: for example, one that is arbitrary, one that has no external value derived from meaning, truths or timelessness. It is possible to imagine a beginning internally consistent but not conditioned by or contingent on historic origins with supposedly self-evident values.17 Thus, while classical origins were thought to have their source in a divine or natural order and modern origins were held to derive their value from deductive reason, "not-classical" origins can be strictly arbitrary, simply starting points, without value. They can be artificial and relative, as opposed to natural, divine, or universal. 8 Such artificially determined beginnings can be free of universal values because they are merely arbitrary points in time, when the architectural process commences. One example of an artificial origin is a graft, as in the generic insertion of an alien body into a host to provide a new result. As opposed to a collage or a montage, which lives within a context and alludes to an origin, a graft is an invented site, which does not so much have object characteristics as those of process. A graft is not in itself genetically arbitrary. Its arbitrariness is in its freedom from a value system of nonarbitrariness (that is, the classical). It is arbitrary in its provision of a choice of reading which brings no external value to the process. But further, in its artificial and relative nature a graft is not in itsel necessarily an achievable result, but merely a site that contains motivation for action—that is the beginning of a process.20

Motivation takes something arbitrary—that is, something in its artificial state which is not obedient to an external structure of values—and implies an action and a movement concerning an internal structure which has an inherent order and an internal logic. This raises the question of the motivation or purpose from an arbitrary origin. How can something be arbitrary and non-goal oriented but still be internally motivated? Every state, it can be argued, has a motivation toward its own being-a motion rather than a direction. Just because architecture cannot portray or enact reason as a value does not mean that it cannot argue systematically or reasonably. In all processes there must necessarily be some beginning point; but the value in an arbitrary or intentionally fictive architecture is found in the intrinsic nature of its action rather than in the direction of its course. Since any process must necessarily have a beginning and a movement, however, the original origin must be considered as having at least a methodological value--a value concerned with generating the internal relations of the process itself. But if the beginning is in fact arbitrary, there can be no direction toward closure or end, because the motivation for change of state (that is, the inherent instability of the beginning) can never lead to a state of no change (that is, an end). Thus, in their freedom from the universal values of both historic origin and directional process, motivations can lead to ends different from those of the previous value-laden end.

## The End of the End

Along with the end of the origin, the second basic characteristic of a "not-classical" architecture, therefore, is its freedom from a priori goals or ends--the end of the end. The end of the classical also means the end of the myth of the end as a valueladen effect of the progress or direction of history. By logically leading to a potential closure o thought, the fictons o the cassical wakene a desire to confront,display, and even transcend the end of history. This desire was manifest in the modern idea of utopia, a time beyond history. It was thought that objects imbued with value becthelatishi evidentyeaniu coul meow send the present in moving toward a timeless future, a utopi This ide  progress gave false value to the present; utopia, a form of fantasizing about an "open" and limitless end, forestalled the notion of closure. Thus the modern crisis of closure marked the end of the process of moving toward the end. Such crises (or ruptures) in our perception of the continuity of history arise not so much out of a change in our idea of origins or ends than out of the failure of the present (and its objects) to sustain our expectations of the future. And once the continuity of history is broken in our perception, any representation of the classical, any "classicism," can be seen e    , the end raises the possibility of the invention and realization of a blatantly fictional future (which is therefore non-threatening in its "truth" value) as opposed to a simulated or idealized one.

With the end of the end, what was formerly the process of como subtraction from an origin. Instead, the process becomes one of modification——the invenoalelal s.T vented" origins from which this process receives its motivation differ from the cumstance, adopted for the moment anid not forever. The process of modification can be seen as an open-ended tactic rather than a goal-oriented strategy. A strategy is a process that is determined and value-laden before it begins: it is directed. Since the arbitrary origin cannot be known in advance (in a cognitive sense), it does not depend on knowlege derived from the classical tradition and thus cannot engender a strategy.

In this context architectural form is revealed as a "place of invention" rather than as a subservient representation of another architecture or as a scpril .vn ire oiue cause; inorder to be a cause, it must arise from something outside a directed straty of composition.

The end of the end also concerns the end of object representatecture was used to convey such forces as tension, compression, extension, and elongation; these were qualities that could be seen, if not literally in the objects them selves, then in the relationship between objects. The idea of the metaphor here has nothing to do with the qualities generated between buildings or between buildings ha ate a kind of non-representational figuration in the object. This is an appeal, not to the classial aethetheje, but to the potential peto an architectural text. The problem, then, is to distinguish texts from representations, to convey the idea references to other objects or values.

This suggests the idea of architecture as "writing" as opposed to architecture as image. What is being "written" is not the object itself—its mass and volume—but the act of massing. This idea gives a metaphoric body to the act of architecture. It then signals its reading through an other system of signs, called traces.2 Traces are not to be read literally, sinçe they have no other value than to signal the idea that there is a reading event and that reading should take place; trace signals the idea to read.²3 Thus a trace is a partial or fragmentary sign; it has no objecthood. It signifies an action that is in process. In this sense a trace is not a simulation of reality; it is a dissimulation because it reveals itself as distinct from its former reality. It does not simulate the real, but represents and records the action inherent in a former or future reality, which has a value no more or less real than the trace itself. That is, trace is unconcerned with forming an image which is the representation of a previous architecture or of social customs and usages; rather, it is concerned with the marking—literally the figuration—of its own internal processes. Thus the trace is the record of motivation, the record of an action, not an image of another object-origin.

volve an idea of a reader conscious of his own identity as a reader rather than as a user or observer. It proposes a new reader distanced from any external value system (particularly an architectural-historical system). Such a reader brings no a priori competence to the act of reading other than an identity as a reader. That is, such a reader has no preconceived knowledge of what architecture should be (in terms of its proportions, textures, scale, and the like; nor does a "not-classical" architecure aspire to make itself understandable through these preconceptions.24

The competence of the reader (of architecture) may be defined as the capacity to distinguish a sense of knowing from a sense of believing. At any given time the conditions for "knowledge" are "deeper" than philosophic conditions; in fact, they provide the possibility of distinguishing philosophy from literature, science from magic, and religion from myth. The new competence comes from the capacity to read per se, to know how to read, and more importantly, to know how to read (but not necessarily decode) architecture as a text. Thus the new "object" must have the cpacity to reveal itself first of all as a text, as a reading event. The architectural fiction proposed here differs from the classical fiction in its primary condition as a text and in the way it is read: the new reader is no longer presumed to know the nature of truth in the object, either as a representation of a rational origin or as a manifestation of a universal set of rules governing proportion, harmony, and ordering. But further, knowing how to decode is no longer important; simply, language in this context is no longer a code to assign meanings (that this means that). The activity of reading is first and foremost in the recognition of something as a language (that it is). Reading, in this sense, makes available a level of indication rather than a level of meaning or expression.

Therefore, to propose the end of the beginning and the end of the end2²5 is to propose the end of beginnings and ends of value-to propose an other "timeless" space of invention. It is a "timeless" space in the present without a determining relation to an ideal future or to an idealized past. Architecture in the present is seen as a process of inventing an artificial past and a futureless present. It remembers a no-longer future.

This paper is basedon three non-verifable assumptions or values: timeless oiless) architecture.

## Notes

1.Jean Baudrillard, "The Order of Simulacra," in Simulations (New York: Semiotext(e), 1983), p. 83. Baudrillard portrays the period beginning in the fifteenth century by three different simulacra: counterfeit, production, and simulation. He says that the first is based on the natural law of value, the second on the commercial law of value, and the third on the structural law of value.

The term "classical" is often confused with the idea of the "classic" and with the stylisic method of "classicism." That which is classic, according to Joseph Rykwert, invokes the idea of "ancient and exemplary" and suggests "authority and distinction": it is a model of what is excellent or of the first rank. More importantly, it implies its own timelessness, the idea that it is frst rank at any time. Classicism, as opposed to the cassical, will be defined here as a method of attempting to produce a "classic" result by appealing to a asscl past.Thi accr wih the  iven y Sir Jon Sron, rwho classicism is not o much a et o ideas nd value as it is a style.He maintains that whil much of Gothic architecture was based on the same proportional relationships as the casltu theRece coul cnu Gothcthe w a Renaissance palazzo: it simply did not have the look of classicism. In contrast, Demetri Porphyrios argues that classicism is not a style, but instead has to do with rationalism: "sm  rhitu   tecire, s y denitpr t ity. . . . The lessons to be learned today from classicism, therefore, are not to be found in classicism's stylish wrinkles but in classicism's rationality." Porphyrios here confuses classicism with the classical and the classic, that is, with a set of values privileging the "truth" (that is, rationality) of tectonics over "expression" and error. The fallacy of this approach ishat classicism rel on iehistoricl continuity herent in the as caltherefore it des not produce the timelessness characteris the cassiThe classical, by implication, has a more relative status than the classic: it evokes a timeless past, a 'golden age" superior to the modern time or the present.

Michel Foucault, The Order of Things (New York: Random House, 1973). It is precisely Foucault's distinction between the classical and modern that has never been adequately articulated in relationship to architecture. In contrast to Foucault's epistemological differentiation, architecture has remained an uninterrupted mode of representation from the fifteenth century to the present. In fact, it will be seen that what is assumed in architecture to be classical is, in Foucault's terms, modern, and what is assumed in architecture to be modern is in reality Foucault's classical. Foucault's distinction is not what is at issue here, but rather the continuity that has persisted in architecture from the cassical to the present day.

4. Foucault's use of the term in defining a continuous periodof knowledge, it is necessary to point out that the time period here defined as the classical episteme differs from Foucault's definition. Foucault locates two discontinuities in the development of Western cultu: the cassical an the modem.Heientifs the cassical beginning i the - seventeenth century, with the priniacy of the intersection of language and representation: tal g, e  u tion withi laguge: wy nguage provimeanig culd be rreend wh language. On the other hand, Foucault identifies the modern, originating in the early lytic processes over language and representation.

Teassls o he as It y vleute whi, when te  the te assil eI ha e ai  uha conditions of the classical (origin, end, and the process ocomposition) are under reconsideration. Thus it might be more accurate to title this essay"The End of the Classical as Classic."

6. Franco Borsi, Leon Battista Alberti (New York: Harper and Row, 1977). The facade of the church of Sant'Andrea in Mantua by Alberti is one of the frst uses of the transposition of ancient building types to achieve both verification and authority. It marks, as Borsi says iv ur  I l "vernacular" to revive the classical temple front because the function of the temple in antiquity and the church in the fifteenth century were similar. However, it is quite another matter to overlay the temple front with the triumphal arch. (See Rudolf Wittkower, Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism [New York: Norton, 1971], and also D. S. Chambers, that with the authority of God in question, man must resort to the symbols of his own power to verify the church. Thus the use of the triumphal arch becomes a message on the facade of Sant'Andrea rather than an embodiment of its inherent meaning.

7.Jeff Kipnis, from a seminar at the Graduate School of Design, Harvard University, 28 February 1984. "Form cannot follow function until function (including but not limited to use) has first emerged as a possibility of form."

8. Robert Venturi Denise Scot Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learnig from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form, rev. ed. (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977), p. 87.

9. S thel BeyondUtopi:ChanigAttides inAmeicnArchiure Michael BlacwProu tions, New York City, 1983.

Baudrillard, Simulations, pp. 8-. In referring to the death of the reality of God, Baudrillard says "metaphysical despair came from the idea that images concealed nothing at all, and that in fact they were not images . . . but actually perfect simulacra."

Leon Battista Alberti, On Painting (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966), pp. 68-74.

Morris Kline, Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), .Martin Heidegger, "On the Essence of Truth," from Basic Writings (New York: Harper and Row, 1977). "Aberrancy is the essential counteressence to the primordial essence of the truth. Errancy opens itself up as the open region for every opposite essential truth. .. Errancy and the concealing of what is concealed belong to the primordial essence of truth."

.Gilles Deleuze, "Plato and the Simulacrum," October 27 (1983), pp. 5252. Deleuze uses a slightly different terminology to address a very similar set of issues: he discusses the Platonic distinction between model, copy and "simulacrum" as a means of assigning value and hierarchical position to objects and ideas. He explains the overthrow of Platonism as the suspension of the a priori value-laden status of the Platonic copy in order to: "raise up simulacra, to assert their rights over icons or copies. The problem no longer concerns the distinction Essence/Appearance or Model/Copy. This whole distinction opeates in the worldorepresentationThe simulacrum is not degrade copy, ra y at least two divergent series interiorized in the simulacrum neither can be assigned as original or copy. It doesn't even work to invoke the model of the Other, because no model resists the vertigo of the simulacrum" (p. 52-53). Simulation is used here in a sense which cosely approximates Deleuze's use of copy  icon, while dissimulation is conceptually very close to his description of the pre-Socratic simulacra.

15.Baudrillard, Simulations, p. 2. In the essay "The Precession of Simulacra" Baudrillard discusses the nature of simulation and the implication of present-day simulacra on our perception of the nature of reality and representation: "Something has disappeared: the sovereign difference between them (the real and . . . simulation models) that was the abstraction's charm."

16. Baudrillard, Simulations, p. 5. Distinguishing between simulation and what he calls "dissimulation," Baudrillard says that "to dissimulate is to feign to have what one hasn't. . .. 'Someone who feigns an illness can simply go to bed and make believe that he is ill. Someone who simulates an illness produces in himself some of the symptoms.' (Littré) Thus feigning . . . is only masked: whereas simulation threatens the difference between 'true' and 'false,' between 'real' and 'imaginary.' Since the simulator produces 'true' symptoms, is he ill or not?" According to Baudrillard, simulation is the generation by models of a reality without origin: it no longer has to be rational, since it is no longer measured against some ideal or negative instance. While this sounds very much like my proposal of the not-classical, the not-classical is fundamentally different in that it is a dissimulation and not a simulation. Baudrillard discusses the danger in the realization of the simulacra—for when it enters the real world it is its nature to take on the "real" attributes of that which it is simulating. Dissimulation here is defined differently: it makes apparent the simulation with all of its implications on the values of "reality," without distorting the simulacra or allowing it to lose its precarious position, poised between the real and the unreal, the model and the other.

17.What is at issue in an artificial origin is not motivation (as opposed to an essential or originary cause, as in an origin of the classical) but rather the idea of self-evidence. In deductive logic reading backward inevitably produces self-evidence. Hence the analytic process of the classical would always produce a self-evident origin, Yet there are no a priori self-evident procedures which could give one origin any value over any other. It can be proposed in a not-classical architecture that any initial condition can produce selfevident procedures that have an internal motivation.

8The idea of arbitrary or artificial in this sense must be distinguished from the classical in language. Arbitrary in this context means having no natural connection. The insight that origins are a contingency of language is based on an appeal to reading: the origin can be arbitrary because it is contingent on a reading that brings its own strategy wit it.

JonatulOnecnrucTheoy rie Strca thorUnv sity Press, 1982). This is basicaly similar to Jacques Derrida's useof graft in literary deconstruction. He discusses graft as an element which can be discovered in a text through a deconstructive reading: "Deconstruction is, among other things, an attempt to scion or line of argument has been spliced with another? . . . Focusing on these moments, deconstruction elucidates the heterogeneity of the text" (p. 135). The three defining l s h ule It is i by h i ehept stability and also allows modificaton to take place. (3)In theincision there must be something which allows for an energy to be cut off by the coming together of the two i wa  tocemon an therucir intbl tert motivation. This paper, which concentrates on transposing these ideas from a pure analytic framework to a program or work, is more concered with what happens in the one could find a static or undeveloped moinent of graft in an architectural text: one would be more likely to read only its results. Graft is used here in a way that cosely resembles Culler's analysis of Derrida's method for deconstruction of opposition: "T deconstruct an opposition . . .is not to destroy it. . . . To deconstruct an opposition is to undo and displace i, to situate it differenty" (p. 150). "This concentration on the appr has been relegated to the margins or set aside by previous interpreters may be important precisely for those reasons that led it to be set aside" (p. 140). Derrida emphasizes graft as a non-dialectic condition of opposition: this paper stresses the processual aspects which emerge from the moment of graft. The major differences are of terminology and emphasis,

posiive term ives us the paradoxicalnotion oan instituted trace, a structureointe referral n which therear nly traces—traces prior to ay entiy whic they might be the trace."

Tdeiurelao hov put ortin thispaper.LikDerri' nstiu trace,"moatn descbe whic is inteally cnstnt, but birary in that it has o begiig o ndan necessary or valued direction. It remains a system of differences, comprehensible only in terms of the spaces between elements or moments of the process. Thus, motivation here is similar to Derrida's description of diferance—it is the force within theobject that causes it to be the dynamic at every point of a continuous transformation.

21Jeff Kipnis, "Architecture Unbound," unpublished paper, 1984. Modification is one aspect of extension which is defined by Kipnis as a component of decomposition. While extension is any movement from an origin (or an initial condition), modification is a specific form of extension concerned with preserving the evidence of initial conditions (for example, through no addition or subtraction of materiality). On the other hand, synthesis is an example of extension which does not attempt to maintain evidence of initial conditions but rather attempts to create a new whole.

The concept of trace in architecture as put forward here is similar to Derrida's idea in that it suggests that there can be neither a representational object nor representable "reality." Architecture becomes text rather than object when it is conceived and presented as a system of differences rather than as an image or an isolated presence. Trace is the visual manifestation of this system of differences, a record of movement (without direction) causing us to read the present object as a system of relationships to other prior and subsequent movements. Trace is to be distinguished from Jacques Derrida's use of the term, for Derrida directly relates the idea of "difference" to the fact that it is impossible to isolate "presence" as an entity. "The presence of motion is conceivable only insofar as every instant is already marked with the traces of the past and future. . . . The present instant is not the past and future. . . . The present instant is not something given but a product of the relations between past and future. If motion is to be present, presence must already be marked by difference and deferral" (Culler, On Deconstruction, pp. 9495). The idea that presence is never a simple absolute runs counter to all of our intuitive convictions. If there can be no inherently meaningful presence which is not itself a system of differences, then there can be no value-laden or a priori origin.

We have always read architecture. Traditionally, it did not induce reading but responded to it. The use of arbitrariness here is an idea to stimulate or induce the reading of traces without references to meaning but rather to other conditions of process—that is, to stimulate pure reading without value or prejudice, as opposed to interpretation.

Previously, there was assumed to be an a priori language of value, a poetry, existing within architecture. Now we are saying that architecture is merely language. We read whether we know what language we are reading or not. We can read French without understanding French. We can know someone is speaking nonsense or noise. Before we are competent to read and understand poetry we can know something to be language.

Compare Franco Rella, "Tempo della fine e tempo dell'inizio" (The Age of the End and the Age of the Beginning), Casabella 489/499 (January-February 1984), pp. 106- 108. The similarity to the title of Rella's article is coincidental, for we use the terms "beginning" and "end" for entirely different purposes. Rella identifes the present as the age of the end, stating that the paradoxical result of progress has been to create a culture that simultaneously desires progress and is burdened with a sense of passing and the chronic sense of irredeemable loss. The result is a culture which "does not love what has been but the end of what has been. It hates the present, the existing, and the changing. It therefore loves nothing" Rella's article poses the question of whether it is possible to build today, to design in a way that is with rather than against time. He desires the return to a sense of time-boundedness and the possibility of living in one's own age without attempting to return to the past. The mechanism by which he proposes to re-create this possibility is myth. He differentiates myth from fiction, and it is this difference which illuminates the opposition between his proposal and the propositions of this paper. Myth is defined as a traditional story of ostensibly historical events that serves to unfold part of the worldview of a people in the traditional value-laden sense, giving history and thus value to timeless or inexplicable events. Rella dismisses fiction as verisimilitude, merely creating the appearance of truth. Instead of attempting to return to the past, myth attempts to create a new beginning, merely situating us at an earlier, and less acute, state of anxiety. But a myth cannot alleviate the paradox of progress. Against both of these, "The End of the Beginning and the End of the End" proposes dissimulation, which is neither the simulation of reality as we know it, nor the proposal of an alternate truth, which appeals to the identical terrifying structures of belief-that is, origins, transformation, and ends. "The End of the Classical" insists on maintaining a state of anxiety, proposing fiction in a self-reflexive sense, a process without origins or ends which maintains its own fictionality rather than proposing a simulation of truth,

Te Overexposed Citya vill urexposée,from espacecritique Christian Bourgeois, 1984); translated in Zone 12 (New York: Urzone, 1986), trans. Astrid Hustvedt

While the train, automobile, and airplane interrupted and distorted the rationalized space of the nineteenth-century city of industrialism, these technologies did not fundamentally challenge the representational paradigm that understands forces of communication and speed to produce visible effects. Architectural surfaces still formed boundaries, cities still comprised clusters of locales, and space was still managed perspectivally. Paul Virilio, guided by his own "law of proximity," argues that, with the passage from mechanical transport of an earlier epoch to the absolute speed of present-day telecommunication, the relevant interval of analysis shifts from space to time and, ultimately, to light —to the electromagnetic waves that permit the interactivity and relativization of space and time. "The city of the future is the pleasure of the interval." And when the interval is light, mechanically proximate space yields to electromagnectic proximity (simultaneous and instantaneous) and the city grid to the informational network; immediate practice is displaced by "teleaction," and geopolitics by chronopolitics. This is the overexposed city, whose images range from the comparatively benign ubiquity of televisions, computer screens, and fax machines to the horrifying penetration of the nuclear flash into Hiroshima's darkest recesses.

For in the overexposed city, the architectural organism is no longer opaque, occlusive, and inscribed with visible information, but, like the human body on which it was formerly based, porous and vulnerable to the intrusion of forces that are no more visible than an electron—and no less real. Here and there, interior and exterior, private and public—these distinctions on which architecture has depended—no longer hold, and the resultant insecurity of territory ranges from the city to one's own body. Virilio's later work, especially War and Cinema (1984) and The Art of the Motor (1993), would pursue the fusion of teletechnology, biology, and the arrangement of the environment, and remind us that perception and destruction can be disturbingly coterminous. The present essay is a preliminary exploration of the emergent representational paradigm—an "aesthetics of disappearance"—and of new ways of analyzing a city whose structure can no longer be seen in the materials and locations that realize it. Since the world system is now not so much global as virtual—like a cinematic shot f Virilios night tables"receding into one-dimensional pixels as the skycam is propelled into orbit—information technology becomes the representational solution to the new representational problem.

The Overexposed City" was republished in 1986 as the first sis of the city of timespaces.

## Notes

1. Kazu Shioarainterviw with Virgi Luc, D'Architecure7 Augus 9 citenul Loy,o  ArhuThe ac"Where given, se by sidean elevator r ecalator and a siple taircase o subway corridor, a conveyor belt walkway is provided, no one would walk in the corridor.

So it is with telecommunications: to transmit an electronic impulse is better than to transport a piceof paper; but to transport a letter is better than to send amessenger. And so thenotions, cntal oarhitecurwithin nwithout, whicaadually o Inhaalyeldia and below begin to lose theircharacteristicdistinction in theerection ofbuildings" (p.132). 2. uViriWar ia:TheLogiicerton  tra tricCr (London: Verso, 1989); The Art of the Motor (1993), trans. Julie Rose (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995).

At the beginning of the 1960s, with the black ghetto revolts in full swing, the mayor of Philadelphia declared: "From now on, state lines cross inside the city." While this sentence expressed a political reality for the victims of American discrimination, it more importantly opened onto a much wider dimension because the Berlin Wall had just been erected, on August 13, 1961, in the Reich's ancient capital. Since then, the mayor's assertion has continued to prove true. Only a few years ago in Belfast and Londonderry, certain streets were marked with a yellow band, dividing Protestants and Catholics, before both moved further apart, leaving behind a fenced in no-man's-land that made for an even stronger separation between their neighborhoods. Beirut came next, with its east and west quarters, its domestic frontiers, its tunnels, its mined boulevards. In fact, this declaration, made by the leader of a large American metropolis, underscored a general phenomenon affecting capitals as well as provincial cities. The phenomenon of obligatory introversion, in which cities, just like industrial companies, suffered the first effects of a multinational economy, led to a significant urban redeployment. On the one hand, it contributed to the disruption of certain working-class cities such as Liverpool or Sheffield in England, Detroit or St. Louis in the United States, and Dortmund in Germany. On the other hand, new urban centers developed around gigantic international airports—the Metroplex-metropolitan complexes such as Dallas-Fort Worth.

With the beginning of the worldwide economic crisis in the 1970s, these airports were constructed in order to conform to defense imperatives against hijacking. Buildings were no longer built according to traditional technical constraints, but were designed to minimize the risk of "terrorist contamination." Sites were planned to discriminate between a sterile zone (departures) and a nonerile zone (arrivals). All crcuits an circit breaks (i.passengers, baggage freight), as well as the general flow of traffc, were submitted to a discriminatory (interior/exterior) transit system. Consequently, the building's architectural form became less the result of anindividual architect's personality than of the necessary precautions taken for public safety. As the state's last gateway, the airport became, lk theor,he harr  the train satno the pas te place the neey regulation of exchange and communication. For this very reason, it also became the perfect field for intense control and high surveillance experimentation. An "air and border patrol" was developed, and their antiterrorist exploits made headines, as, for example, in the case of the Gs.G9 German guards' intervention in the Mogadishu hijacking several thousand kilometers from their jurisdiction.

From that moment on, it was no longer simply a matter of isolatng he cnagiou upece pern  cnnement as te pa rather of intercepting him in the course of his journey, in order to examine his hu o and detectors at mandatory passageways. French prisons with high-security quarters were also equipped with these same magnetic doors which had been installed i utmost freedom in travel served as a model for penitentiary incarceration. Previously, in several American residential areas, security was carried out only by closed-circuit televisions hooked up to police headquarters. In banks and supermar-we  h t a e a of passage are no longer intermittent—they have become immanent.

Given such a perspective without horizons, the way one gains rc an electronic audiencing system whose users are not so much inhabitants or privileged residents as they are interlocutors in permanent transit. From this moment on, breaks in continuity occur less within the boundary of a physical urban space and industrial redeployment have incessantly restructured through a series of inter ruptions (closing of companies, unemployment, variable work schedules, etc.) and through successive or simultaneous transformations which have managed to organize and reorganize the urban milieu to the point of bringing about a decline, an irreversible deterioration of urban sites, as in, for example, the large townhouses near Lyons where the occupant turnover rate became so high (no one stayed more than a year) that it caused the ruin of a residential complex otherwise considered satisfactory.

In fact, since men first began using enclosures, the notion of what a boundary is has undergone transformations which concern both the facade and what it faces, its vis-à-vis. From the fence to the screen, by way of the rampart's stone walls, the boundary-surface has been continually transformed, perceptibly or imperceptibly. Its most recent transformation is perhaps that of the interface. The question of access to the city, then, should be asked in a new way: Does a greater metropolis still have a facade? At what moment can the city be said to face us? The popular expression "to go into the city," which has replaced last century's "to go to the city," embodies an uncertainty regarding relations of opposites ( the vis-â- vis and the face-a-face ), as though we were no longer ever in front of the city but always inside it. If the metropolis still occupies a piece of ground, a geographical position, it no longer corresponds to the old division between city and country, nor to the opposition between center and periphery. The localization and the axiality of the urban layout faded long ago. Suburbia was not single-handedly responsible for this dissolution. The very opposition "intramural"/"extramural" was itself weakened by the revolution in transportation and the development of communications and telecommunications, which resulted in the nebulous conurbation of an urban fringe. In effect, we are witnessing a paradoxical phenomenon in which the opacity of construction materials is virtually being eliminated. With the emergence of portative structures, curtain walls made of light and transparent materials (glass, plastics) are replacing the stone facade at the same time that the tracing paper, acetate and plexiglass used in project studies are replacing the opacity of paper.

On the other hand, with the screen interface (computers, television, teleconferencing) the surface of inscription—until now devoid of depthcomes into existence as "distance," as a depth of field of a new representation, a visibility without direct confrontation, without a face-a-face, in which the old vis-à- vis of streets and avenues is effaced and disappears. Thus, differences between positions blur, resulting in unavoidable fusion and confusion. Deprived of objective limits, the architectonic element begins to drift, to float in an electronic ether devoid of spatial dimensions yet inscribed in the single temporality of an instantaneous diffusion. From this moment on, no one can be considered as separated by physical obstacles or by significant "time distances." With the interfacade of monitors and control screens, "elsewhere" begins here and vice versa. This sudden reversion of limits and oppositions introduces into the space of common experience what had previously belonged only to the realm of microscopy. Solid substance no longer exists; instead, a limitless expanse is revealed in the false perspective of the apparatuses' luminous emission. Constructed space now occurs within an electronic topology, where the framing of the point of view and the scanlines of numerical images give new form to the practice of urban mapping. Replacing the old distinctions between public and private and "habitation" and "circulation" is an overexposure in which the gap between "near" and "far" ceases to exist, in the same way that the gap between "micro" and "macro" disappears through electronic microscope scanning.

The representation of the contemporary city is thus no longer determined by a ceremonial opening of gates, by a ritual of processions and parades, nor by a succession of streets and avenues. From now on, urban architecture must deal with the advent of a "technological space-time." The access protocol of telematics replaces that of the doorway. The revolving door is succeeded by "data banks," by new rites of passage of a technical culture masked by the immateriality of its components: its networks, highway systems and diverse reticulations whose threads are no longer woven into the space of a constructed fabric, but into the sequences of an imperceptible planning of time in which the interface man/machine replaces the facades of buildings and the surfaces of ground on which they stand.

Only a short time ago, the opening of the city's gates was determined by the alternating of day and night. Today, however, since we not only open the shutters but also the television,' daylight itself has been changed. A false electronic day, whose only calendar is based on "commutations" of information bearing no relationship whatsoever to real time, is now added to the solar day of astronomy, electric light and the dubious "daylight" of candles. Chronological and historical time, which passes, is thus succeeded by a time that instantaneously exposes itsel. On the terminal's screen, a span of time becomes both the surface and the support o insciption; time literally r, rather, cinematically surfaces. Due to the cathodry tube's imperceptible substance, the dimensions of space become inseparable from thn iu nak disappear into the heterogeneity of advanced technology's temporal regime. Urban form is no longer designated by a line of demarcation between here and there, but has become synonymous with the programming of a "time schedule." Its gateway is less a door which must be opened than an audio-visual protocol—a protocol which reorganizes the modes of public perception.

In this realm of deceptive appearances, where the populating of transportation and transmission time supplants the populating of space and habitation, inertia revives an old sedentariness (the persistence of urban sites). With the advent of instantaneous communications (satellite, TV, fiber optics, telematics) arrival supplants departure: everything arrives without necessarily having to depart. Only yesterday, metropolitan areas maintained an opposition between an "intramuralpoulation an a populatonutsie the ty wall;tday, the distcive tions between the city's residents occur only in time: first, long historical time spans which are identified less with the notion of a "downtown" as a whole than with a few specific monuments; and second, technological time spans which have no relation to a calendar of activities, nor to a collective memory, except to that of the computer. Contributing to the creation of a permanent present whose intense pace knows no tomorrow, the latter type of time span is destroying the rhythms of a society which has become more and more debased. And the "monument," no longer the elaborately constructed portico, the monumental passageway punctuated by sumptuous edifices, but idleness, the monumental wait for service in front of machinery: everyone bustling about while waiting for communication or telecommunication machines, the lines at highway tollbooths, the pilot's checklist, night tables as computer consoles. Ultimately, the door is what monitors vehicles and various vectors whoe breaks  continuity cmpose less a space than a kncunown n which the urgency of work time plays the part of a time center, while unemployment and vacaion time play the part the periphery—the suburb of time:a clearing away activities whereby everyone is exiled to a life of both privacy and deprivation.

If, in spite of the wishes of postmodern architects, the ciy from nowon is to be deprivedo doors, i is due t the fact that the urban wall has iven way to an infinity of openings and ruptured enclosures. While they are less apparent than those antquity, they re just s real, constraining and segregating Thill sions surrounding the industrial revolution of transportation have deluded us about the unlimited nature of progress. The industrial structuring of time has imperceptibly compensated for the disruption of rural territory. If in the nineteenth century the lure of the city emptied agrarian space of its substance (cultural, social), at the end of the twentieth century it is urban space which loses in its turn its geographical reality. This reality is lost to the sole benefit of instantaneous deportation systems whose technological intensity continuously upsets social structures: the deportation of people through the redeployment of production modes; the elimination of attention, of human confrontation, of the direct face-a-face, of the urban vis-a-vis, which all takes place at the level of the man/machine interface. In fact, all of this is part of another type of concentration, a nascent transnational and posturban concentration which has been revealed by many recent events.

In spite of continual rises in the cost of energy, middle-class Americans are evacuating eastern metropolitan areas. After the decay of inner cities, which subsequently became ghettoes, comes the current deterioration of the cities themselves as regional centers.

From Washington to Chicago, from Boston to Saint Louis, the gat urban centers are depopulating New ork has los ver the course the last decade, 10 percent of its population. As for Detroit, it saw more than 20 percent of its inhabitants disappear; Cleveland, 23 percent; Saint Louis, 27 percent. Certain neighborhoods in these cities already resemble the ghost towns immortalized by American cinema.

These are premonitory signs of an imminent postindustrial deurbanization, and this exodus will most likely affect all developed countries. Foreseeable for about 40 years now, this deregulation of urban planning originates from an economic and political illusion about the permanence of sites constructed in the era of time management (automobile) and in the era of audio-visual development of retinal persistence--the afterimage.

"Every surface is an interface between two milieus in which a constant activity prevails, taking the form of an exchange between two substances placed in contact with one another." This new scientific definition illustrates how contamination is at work in the concept of surface: the surface-boundary becomes an osmotic membrane, a blotter. Even if this last etymology is more rigorous than preceding ones, it nonetheles points to a change affecting the notion of limitation. The limitation of space becomes commutation, a radical separation, mandatory passageways, a transit of constant activity, nonstop exchanges, a transference between two milieus, two substances. What used to be a substance's boundary line, its "terminal," now becomes an access route concealed in the most imperceptible entity. From this moment on, the appearance of surfaces hides a secret transparency, a thickness without thickness, a volume without volume, an imperceptible quantity.

If this situation corresponds to the outward appearance of the infinitely small, it also reaches that of the infinitely large: if what was visibly nothing becomes "something," then it follows that the longest distance no longer cuts off perception; that is, even the most vast geophysical expanse contracts and becomes concentrated. In the interface of the screen, everything is already there to be seen in the immediacy of instantaneous transmission. When Ted Turner decided, for example, to launch Cable News Network in Atlanta in 1980, a channel providing live news around the clock, he metamorphosed his subscribers' apartments into a type of station of world events.

Because of satellites, the cathode-ray window is capable of presenting antipodes along with the light of a different day to each one of its viewers. If space is that which prevents everything from being in the same place, this abrupt confinement brings everything—absolutely everything—back to that place which has no place. The exhaustion of natural relief and of temporal distances creates a telescoping of any localization, of any position. As in the case of events televised live, places also become interchangeable at will.

The instantaneousness of ubiquity results in the atopia of a single interface. Speed, which replaces the distances of space and time, abolishes the notion of physical dimension. Suddenly, speed returns to a primary scale which resists any kind of measurement, whether it be temporal or spatial. This phenomenon is equivalent to an instant of inertia of the environment. With the intense acceleration of telecommunications, the old city disappears, only to give birth to a new form of concentration: the concentration of residentialization without residence, in which property lines, enclosures and partitions are no longer the result of permanent physical obstacles but of interruptions of an emission or of an electronic shadow zone which mimics sunshine and the shadows of buildings. A strange topology is concealed within the conspicuousness of televised images. The sequences of an invisible montage replace the architect's blueprints. It used to be geographical space which was structured according to a geometrical setting of boundaries (urban or rural). Today it is time which is structured according to an imperceptible fragmentation of a technological time span in which cutting—amomentary interruption—replaces lasting just as in the past the railway replaced the ephemeris.

The camera has become our best inspector," John F. Kennedy declared a short while before he was killed on a street in Dallas. Actually, the camera allos us to participate in—lvern tape—crtai political vents n certai cal phenomena, such as phenomena of breaking into effraction, in which the city lets itself be seen through and through, and phenomena of breaking apart diffraction, in which its image is reflected beyond the atmosphere to the ends of space. And meanwhile, the endoscope and the scanner are permitting us to see life in its most remote world without antipodes, without hidden sides, a world in which opacity is no longer anything but a momentary "interlude." It must be noted, however, that the illusion of proximity does not last very long. Where the polis once inaugurated a catoderay screen, with  hadows an specters  a community in the process pearT a image of an urbanism without urbanity, where tact and contact yield to televisual impact: not only "teleconferencing" which allows for conferring at great distances without having to move, but also "telenegotiating" which, to the contrary, lets one maintain a distance during discussion, even when one's partners are within a close physical range, a little like those telephone maniacs for whom the receiver facilitates belligerncyheymityo ontrolgevi.

Where does the cywiout ga begi? robablyinsie theinds of returning vacationers, taking the form of that fleeting anxiety which grabs them when they think about all the unwanted mail and the possibility that their home has been broken into, their property stolen; and perhaps, also, in the desire to flee, to escape temporarily, from an oppressive technological environment in order to find ga  pulee tgeherThe agai whil spata cpe l s sible, temporal escape is not. Unless one considers the practice of laying-off as an e door,"the ultiate form  paidvacation, runnig away in time  depenen upon a postindustrialillusion, the effects of which are beginning to make themselves felt.Thetheory  hare jobs,alredy ntoduce intent the cu nity, offers each member an alternative plan in which shared timetables could open onto a whole new sharing of space: the reign of an endless periphery where the homeland and the colony would replace the industrial city and its suburbs. (Concerning this subject, see the Community Development Project, a project which promotes local development using the forces of the community itself and aims at assimilating English inner cities.)

Where does the edge of the outer city begin? Where is the door without a city located? Most likely within the new American technology used for the instantaneous destruction (by explosion) of large buildings, and also within the policy of systematic demolition of social housing judged "unfit for the new French way of life," as has been seen in Venissieux, La Courneuve and Gagny. A recent economic study, conducted by the Association for Communications Development, arrived at the following conclusions: "The destruction of 300,000 lodgings over a period of five years would cost 10 billion francs per year, but would provide 100,o00 jobs. Better yet, at the end of the operation demolition-reconstruction, the fiscal receipts would be six to ten billion francs more than the sum which the public originally invested."

One last question must now be asked: during a crisis period,

will the demolition of cities replace the major public works of traditional politics? If so, it would no longer be possible to distinguish between the nature of recessions (economic, industrial) and the nature of war.

Architecture or postarchitecture? In the end, the debate surrounding the notion of modernity seems to belong to a phenomenon of "derealization" which at once affects means of expression, modes of representation and information. The dispute currently taking place in the media with respect to certain political acts and their social communication, is also being extended to architectural expression, which can never be said to be properly cut off from communication systems inasmuch as it continually experiences the direct or indirect side effects of different "means of communication" (automobile, audio-visual, etc.). Along with the technique of construction, there is, one must not forget, the construction of technique, the ensemble of spatial and temporal mutations which continually reorganize on an everyday basis the aesthetic representations of contemporary territory. Constructed space is thus not simply the result of the concrete and material effect of its structures, its permanence and its architectonic or urbanistic references, but also the result of a sudden proliferation, an incessant multiplying of special effects, which, with consciousness of time and distance, affects perception of the environment.

This technological deregulation of different areas is also "topological" inasmuch as it no longer constructs a perceptible and visible chaos, as was the case with certain processes of degradation and destruction (accident, aging, war); to the contrary and paradoxically, it constructs an imperceptible order that, even though invisible, is just as practical as masonry or road and highway systems. Today, it is more than likely that the basis of so called urbanism is composed/decomposed by these very systems of transfer, transit and transmission, the transportation and transmigration networks whose immaterial configurations renew urban organization and the building of monuments. If "monuments" in fact exist today, they are no longer visible, in spite of the revolutions and convolutions of architectural grandioseness. This "disproportion" is no longer inscribed in the order of perceptible appearances, in the aesthetic of volumes assembled under the sun, but in the terminal's obscure luminosity-the home computer and other electronic "night tables." It is too easily forgotten that more than being an ensemble of techniques designed to shelter us from inclemency, architecture is an instrument of measure, a sum of knowledge capable of organizing society's space and time by pitting us against the natural environment. This "geodesic" capacity of defining a unity of time and place for activities now enters into open conflict with the structural capacities of mass communication.

Two procedures confront each other here: one is material, made up of physical elements, precisely situated walls, thresholds and levels; the other is immaterial, its representations, images and messages possessing neither locale nor stability, since they exist only as vectors of a momentary and instantaneous expression, with all the misinterpretations and manipulation of meanings that this implies.

The first procedure, which is architectonic and urbanistic, organizes and constructs geographic and political space in a durable fashion. The second procedure heedlessly structures and destructures space-time, the continuum of society. Obviously, it is not a question here of a Manichaean dualism opposing physics to metaphysics but rather of trying to discern the status of contemporary architecture, in particular the status of urban architecture, placed within the disconcerting concert of advanced technology. Architectonics, which developed along with the city and the discovery and colonialization of new lands, is now, since this quest has been accomplished, continually regressing, accompanied by the decline of large urban areas. While continually investing in internal technical equipment, architecture has become progressively introverted, turning into a sort of machine gallery, an exhibition hall of science and technology, technology born of industrial "machinism," of revolutions in transportation and finally of the all-too-famous "conquest of space. However, it is symptoatichat when spacetechnology is dicuss it is not i ters of architecture but in terms of engineering, an engineering which propels us beyond the atmosphere.

And all of this exists as though architectonics were merely a subsidiary technology surpassed by other technologies which permit sidereal projections and accelerated displacement. Thus, questions are raised concerning the nature of architectural performance, the telluric function of constructed dwellings and the relationship between a particular conception of technology and the earth. The way in which the city has developed as a conservator for ancient technologies has already tions. With its demographic concentration and extreme vertical densification, the urban center is structured in a way that is precisely the opposite of agrarian organization. Advanced technology continues to further this trend with the dramatic expansion of architectonics and in particular with the development of means of tary conquest o space, are projecting dwelings—and perhaps someday will project even cities—into orbit. With inhabited satellites, space shuttles and orbital stations, high technological research and aeronautical industries, architecture is "flying high," but not without repercussions for the fate of postindustrial society, whose cultural points of reference are disappearing one after the other, bringing about a decline of the arts and a slow regression of basic technology. Is urban architecture in the process of becoming a techinology just as outdated as extensive farming? Will architectonics become nothing more than a decadent form of dominating the earth, with consequences analogous to the unbridled exploitation of raw materials? Hasn't the decline in the number of cities also become the symbol of industrial decline and forced unemployment, the symbol of scientific materialism's failure? The recourse to history, propos xpert  serniy merey berfug void e ques tion of time, the regime of transhistoric" temporality generated by technologicl s  xit oy  s n, aetheic, an incapacity to take stock oevents in an environment where appearances are against us. The mounting disequilibrium between indirect and direct information, resulting from the development of various means of communication, tends to heedlessly privilege information mediated in such a way as to jeopardize meaning: the effect of reality seems to supplant immediate reality. The crisis of modernity's grand narratives, about which Lyotard speaks, betrays the presence of new technology, with the emphasis being placed, from now on, on the "means" and not on the "ends."

The grand narratives of theoretical causality were replaced by the li The issue therefore is no longer the"crisis of modernity," the progressive degradation of common ideals, the proto-foundation of History's meaning benefiting narratives which are more or less linked to the autonomous development of an individual, but rather a crisis of narrative itself. That is, the crisis of an official discourse or mode of representation bound until now to the universally recognized capacity—inherited from the Renaissance—to assert, describe and inscribe reality. Thus the crisis of "narrative" appears as the flip side of the crisis of "dimension," understood as a geometrical narrative, a discourse—accessible to all—of the measuring of a visible reality.

The crisis of the grand narrative and the rise of micro-narratives are ultimately the crisis of the "grand" as well as the "little," the advent of disinformation in which disproportion and incommensurability are to postmodernity what the philosophic resolution of problems and the resolution of the image (pictorial, architectural) were to the birth of the Enlightenment.

The crisis of dimension thus appears as the crisis of the whole or, in other words, as the crisis of a substantial, homogeneous space, inherited from archaic Greek geometry, to the benefit of an accidental, heterogeneous space where parts and fractions become essential once again. Urban topology has, however, paid the price for this atomization and disintegration of figures, of visible points of reference which promote transmigrations and transfigurations, much in the same way as landscapes suffered in the face of agricultural mechanization. The sudden breaking up of whole forms and the destruction of the entity caused by industrialization is, however, less perceptible within the space of the city—despite the destructuring of suburbia—than it is in time, in the sequential perception of urban appearances. In fact, for a long time now transparency has replaced appearances. Since the beginning of the twentieth century, the depth of field of classical perspective has been renewed by the depth of time of advanced technology. The development of cinematography and aeronautics followed on the heels of the opening of the "grand boulevards": the Haussmann boulevard procession was followed by the Lumière brothers' invention of accelerated motion; the esplanade of the Invalides was followed by the invalidation of urban planning; the screen abruptly became place-the crossroads of mass media.

From the aesthetics of the appearance of stable images, present precisely because of their static nature, to the aesthetics of the disappearance of unstable images, present because of their motion (cinematic, cinemagraphic), a transmutation of representations has taken place. The emergence of form and volume intended to exist as long as their physical material would allow has been replaced by images whose only duration is one of retinal persistence. Ultimately, it seems that Hollywood, much more than Venturi's Las Vegas, merits a study of urbanism, since, after the theaters of antiquity and the Italian Renaissance, it was the first Cinecitta: the city of living cinema where sets and reality, cadastral urban planning and cinematic footage planning, the living and the living dead merge to the point of delirium. Here, more than anywhere, advanced technologies have converged to create a synthetic space-time. The Babylon of film "derealization," the industrial zone of pretense, Hollywood built itself up neighborhood by neighborhood, avenue by avenue, upon the twilight of appearances, the success of illusions and the rise of spectacular productions (such as those of D. W. Griffith) while waiting for the megalomaniacal urbanization of Disneyland, Disneyworld and Epcot Center.

When Francis Ford Coppola directed One from the Heart by inlaying his actors, by an electronic process, in the filmic framework of a life-sized Las Vegas reconstructed in Zoetrope Company Studios simply because he did not want his shooting to adapt itself to the city, but for the city to adapt itself to his shooting, he surpassed Venturi by far, not so much by demonstrating contemporary architectural ambiguity but by showing the "spectral" character of the city and its inhabitants.

Ray Harryhausen's and Douglas Turnbull's video-electronic special effects were added to the utopian "architecture on paper" of the 1960s at the same time that computer screens were making their way into architectural firms. "Video does not mean I see, but I fly," explained Nam June Paik. In effect, given this technology, "over-view" is no longer a question of theoretical altitude, of scale designs, but has become an opto-electronic interface operating in real time, with all that this implies about the redefinition of image. If aviation, which began the same year as cinematography, instigated a revision of point of view, a radical change in the perception of the world, infographic techniques will instigate, in their turn, a revision of reality and its presentations. This process can also be seen in the "Tactical Mapping System," a videodisc created by the United States Defense Agency for Advanced Research Projects. This system provides a viewing of Aspen in continuity by accelerating or slowing down the procession pace of 54,000 images, changing direction or season as one changes television channels, transforming the litte city into a ons merge.

I oeolgy, against he tetnic  natural rel wih pyrami, towers anhr u z  xiu horizon.

Aogeolyhe "t Va" the metropolis is no longer anything but a ghostly landscape, the fossil of past societies for which technology was stil closely associated with the visible transformations osubstance, a visibility from which science has gradually turned us away.

## Note

Transat's note: In French, the verourr, "toopen,"may also be us to men "o turn on" a television.]

The Perimeter Projects: Notes for Design" Art Papers 8, no. 4 (July-August 1984),

special issue "Without Architecture," edited by Robert Segrest and Jennifer

Bloomer; revised in Assemblage 1 (October 1986)

If taking stock of the trivia and trash of everyday life is epistemological, as Walter Benjamin argued, then one obvious next step is the intentional mapping for cognitive purposes of heretofore unintentional and irrational activities. The construction and use of the American suburb surely qualify as activities of this sort, with the advantage to the would-be cartographer that their analysis entails a concrete, historical content — a particularly American experience of space and its iteration from Herman Melville and Edgar Allan Poe to Laurie Anderson — as well as a form of a new kind not legible with reading habits forged on European capitals.

Robert Segrest's project to produce a map of the American perimeter began as a prospectus for an architectural design studio at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Yet, in his effort to provide exemplary instances of practicing space adequate to the new system "out there," Segrest also produces a concept of architecture as no longer bound to an object, but rather as a web of transactions among various codes—architecture as a kind of commutation device, moving and sorting among different images given by contemporary culture, trucking and exchanging inventories between the various storehouses of knowledge and ideology; architecture as the writing of events rather than as any lived experience. "A suburban architecture . . . is a geography of filaments, of structures in space, of the silent mirage of the drive-in movie (flickers, flicks, Barthes's semic code), the symbiosis not of city and building but of book and building—the playing of the game."

Though Segrest takes recourse in the old destructive characters of modernism —Poe's man of the crowd, Musil's man without qualities, the generic impersonality of Robbe-Grillet's nouveau roman — it is the postcontemporary world of J.. Ballard'Crash and Wim Wenders' aris, Texas, that hentens omapAr ture's entry into this sensibility—into its geography of incidents and necessarily decentered subjects—requires that architecture's categories be developed in spatial rathrhan typologicalAnd it leads ot intoa jyous discovery  a redemptive postmodernism so much as into a phantasmagoria of fragments no less somber than the anomie typically reserved for the damaged modernists from Piranesi to James Joyce. It is here that Segrest registers an ambiguity characteristic of architecture theory in the mid-198os, a skeptical, transgressive kind of writing whose convulsions somehow resemble laughter.

In the wide space of architecture, that which is not the building is of no consequence. Ideas, descriptions, critiques, theories, even ideology—all abstractionsare, in the end, passive and inert, the ether of the architectural space. The objectseparate and privileged—is the sole subject of an enclosed and centripetal order. Architecture is a collection of ruins that closes at six o'clock.

Or so the story has gone. These notes seem first as a transgressor in that orderly and well-lit space. These are other, viral spaces, formed after closing, in darkness and silence, behind hidden doors. The ether, etched and marked as a stone, is the space of literature: a separate army enforced with words; the enemy, Hugo said, of architecture. Vandals in the museum, they rearrange the day works, confuse the titles, paint slogans on the bathroom walls. An indelible stain bleeds across the white skin.

The binary clock that organizes the museum (metaphor) is, of course, faulty. Words did not and do not oppose and destroy. There is, rather, in the abyss between, a state of indifference—a demilitarized zone of foray and brief enin  pepel daw tsk?. Ther the  atalu the actl, possble, desi—likeflaments across the byss.Amap that is both Campo Marzio and Finnegans Wake. From Oedipus to Hopalong, the action occurs at the pass.
