# Research in Art and Design: Research Problems, Programmes and Databases\*

Brian Allison Leicester Polytechnic

\*Paper presented at the conference 'Matrix of Research in Art and Dsign Education' organised by the Council for National Academic Awards and the London Institute at the Central School of Art and Design, London, 28/29th March 1988. The Council for National Academic Awards is the recognised degree awarding and validating body for non-University institutions in the public sector in the U.K. It is usually referred to as CNAA as is the case in this text.

## Introduction

In the context of this paper, the term 'research' is being used to mean some form of systematic enquiry which is reported to the field in which it is located in a form which renders both the methods and outcomes of the enquiry accessible to others. The accessibility criterion is an important one. Whether or not the outcomes of a research project contribute to the 'body of knowledge' of the field is not a judgement of the researcher but of others and this judgement can only be made by reference to evidence which is publically accessible.

I make this point at this stage because both the term 'research' and its use is a contentious one in the field of art and design. It has been generally and genuinely argued that all art and design practice is a kind of research i that the artis or designer s by definition, consciously seeking either a new solution to an existing problem or issue or a solution to a newly identified problem or issue. The problem or issue may be, for example, one relating to the perception of form, on the one hand, or a matter of ergonomics or function and performance, on the other. The process of development from the original idea or intention carries with it an interaction between problem, solution, problem, solution and so on until there is a final or, at least, acceptable conclusion to the inquiry. In the case of fine art and, perhaps, throughout all art and design, it may be argued that the outcome of the 'research', whether it is a painting, piece of sculpture, furniture or machine is, in itself, an embodiment of a statement about the nature of the problem, the pathway of the enquiry and the solution to the problem. Applied in this way, the evidence of the research, its methodology and outcomes are all, to greater or lesser degrees, perceivable, at least, theoretically, in the art or design product. Some would argue that no other reportage is necessary.

This view of research in art and design is reflected in many of the institutional research reports which are now becoming a regular feature in polytechnics and colleges. Whilst, for example, it is typical for faculties of science and technology to give detailed reports on highly specified projects, along with information on funding, degrees awarded and publications in learned journals, the art and design faculty reports not infrequently include staff entries which are often little more than statements of their interests, such as 'enquiry into landscape painting', 'the development of typographical design', 'computer-aided design' or 'furniture for the disabled'. As many of these fields of enquiry, certainly in the way they are described in the research reports, are non-resolvable in any specific sense or do not have a planned terminal point, for the most part they constitute what it is that artists and designers are expected to do as part of the everyday execution of their professional work. When it comes to the ways the research work of students in art and design, particularly postgraduate students, is described and reported, it may be that a somewhat different view needs to be taken.

## Research in Postgraduate Courses

The majority of taught postgraduate courses in all subject fields include some elements of research training and, as part of the final assessment, require the student to undertake an individual research project, the outcomes of which normally are submitted in some appropriate form such as a dissertation or thesis. The preparation of the student to undertake an individual project is normally part of the course — one of the major purposes of the activity is to develop research skills which includes identifying and analysing problems, deciding on strategies for enquiring into those problems, being able to implement the research and, finally, being able to arrive at validly deduced conclusions and report the outcomes to others in some acceptable form — it is on the latter that the student is normally assessed. An overriding aim, of course, is not, or should not be, simply to equip the students with the necessary skills in order to fulfil the requirements for the academic award but to prepare individuais who can adopt appropriate attitudes towards enquiry and have the relevant skills to act in a professional way in the world of art and design outside the art and design department or college. In other words, postgraduate research, in either taught courses or in research degrees, is primarily a training for subsequent professional activity. The point being made here is that student research at any level is principally instrumental. That so few doctoral graduates subsequently do undertake any research is a separate but important question which needs to be looked at closely.

## The Nature of Research Training

If the proper emphasis in postgraduate research is that of research training, then a particular perspective can be placed on the nature and origins of the topics into which the students enquire. In a major sense, the topic can be seen as secondary to the research process being engaged in. No matter how exciting or dull the topic, the student will primarily be examined on the thoroughness with which certain aspects of the research have been pursued, including the validation of the assumptions underlying the research, the analysis of the research problem, the feasibility of the research design, the appropriateness and validity of the instruments employed, the competence of the implementation of the research design, the adequacy of the data gathered as well as the accuracy of the data analysis, the validity and logic of the conclusions derived from the analysis of the data and, of course, the clarity and appropriateness of the reporting of the whole endeavour and its presentation in a form to which the internal and external examiners can have access. If the emphasis placed on the research training is taken to the extreme, the topic becomes the means to an end and not the end itself —— this opposes the view that it is the topic which is the important factor, certainly as far as the assessment of the value of the research is concerned, and that the research methodology and the actual implementation and reporting of the research is a necessary but rather tedious means to that end.

Of course, it is not simply a matter of 'either-or'. In any research project, the research topic and the research methods employed to investigate that topic are unquestionably interactive — each influences the form and interpretation of the other. However, it could be taken to.be axiomatic that a student undertaking a postgraduate course setting out to develop research attitudes and abilities would be expected to acquire an understanding of research methods which range far more widely than those employed to pursue an enquiry into a particular topic. The CNAA, in its Policy Statement on Research and Related Activities,(CNAA, 1984) emphasised this by stating explicitly that research degree students 'are strongly encouraged to participate in a programme of taught postgraduate study embracing theory • and research methodology' (para 2.6.4). It is of interest to note that in the draft of the policy document, published a year earlier, this was expressed more strongly when it was stated that the research students 'are required to participate ..'"

However, as there is a range of research methodologies which can be drawn upon when deciding how a particular topic may be pursued, it would seem that a research training should equip the student with research skills and a repertoire which are not topic or subject specific. By a repertoire, I mean being able to understand and employ the particular strategies characteristic of, for example, historical, philosophical, descriptive, experimental or naturalistic/interpretive research. Each of these research strategies relate to particular kinds of research questions and have their own established procedures. As a consequence, it can be assumed that the research student is being expected to achieve some kind of autonomy in terms of being able to decide which research designs and methodologies are appropriate to investigate specific types of questions. It would be paradoxical, if not inexcusable, of course, if someone with a higher degree which purported to include a research training element was only able to carry out one type of research! As far as I know there is no common acceptance of what a Research Design and Methodologies course should be for research students in art and design and each institution, in effect has to devise its own. I think it would be a mark of real professionalism if tutors of postgraduate courses and research supervisors with experience of offering such courses could act together and, through sharing their experience, develop a basis for a commonly agreed RDM programme specifically for art and design. I am sure that this would raise the level of art and design research and be of enormous help to those institutions or departments which have yet to establish research profiles.

Nevertheless, it may also be a truism that the only way one really learns about research is by actually doing it and this can also be applied to understanding particular and different research methods. The apparent paradox can be resolved by arguing that the carrying out of a particular research project which, by definition, focuses on a particular kind of research strategy, provides that kind of tacit understanding of research as well as an attitude towards research which can be extrapolated to other research methodologies which have been studied but not actually carried out in practice.

## The Importance of the Research Topic

The choice of the research topic and, therefore, the implicit research method appropriate for that topic, which can provide both the vehicle for learning a particular research methodology and the depth experience upon which extrapolation into other methodologies can be based, becomes of critical concern.

Students undertaking postgraduate study, either as taught courses or research degrees, are usually, almost by definition, novices in terms of levels of understanding of the fields in which they are enroled for postgraduate study. If they were not, and this is not discounting the value of experience as practitioners, including work in industry, then there would be little point in enrolling for postgraduate study in the first place. Indeed, a major purpose of most students enrolling for postgraduate study is to update themselves on developments in their fields as well as to be reflective about and capitalise on their previous and, often, extensive professional experience. Hardly any have any previous experience of research.

Research topics do not arise out of a vacuum. In an ideal or, more realistically, any meaningful sense, a prerequisite to the identification of a topic for research is a thorough understanding of the field in which that topic may be located. Such an understanding is necessary, if for no other reason than to ensure that what is being enquired into has not already been resolved — reinventing a wheel through ignorance is neither excusable nor economical. Principally, of course, such a prior knowledge of a field is essential to ensure that the research topic is a valid one, worthy of enquiry and can be pursued in the light of what is already known on the particular issue or topic. This presents a dilemma in some taught higher degree courses because the time constraints are such that individual research topics need to be identified and research work begun before the course work, which would or might otherwise have provided that knowledge base, has been covered. A consequence of this, which not infrequently occurs, is that a student can be well into a research project on a particular topic before the consideration of that topic is encountered as part of the course work. An additional aspect of this problem in some taught courses is that the students' research projects frequently are seen, in themselves, as being particular individualised forms of learning.

The research topic and the way it is identified is, therefore, to stress the point again, of some considerable importance. In a general sense, student research topics appear to be derived from four major sources, although I would not argue that these were discrete.

1. The first source has its origins in a 'felt need' on the part of the potential researcher — this is the first stage in what John Dewey described as the 'scientific method' in research. The 'felt need' or embryonic problem, in this sense, arises normally out of some observation or identified dilemma in the experience of the researcher. Some postgraduate courses expect the applicants to have identified a potential research topic prior to starting the course and, in some cases, acceptance on a course is dependent on a candidate having already identified a topic which is of interest to the course tutors.

The second source lies in questions raised through a study of the literature or earlier research reports. These may be anomalies, ambiguities or conflicts between ideas or theories or simply unresolved questions. In the latter case, for example, these are likely to have identified by other researchers and most research reports include a section headed 'avenues for future research'. To generate a topic from this source requires a good grounding in the literature and considerable subject knowledge in order to be able to question theory, on the one hand, or assess the value of other researchers' work, on the other.

3.The third source is the ongoing research activity in the institution or department which throws up aspects which have the potential for further systematic enquiry. A student's ability to cul in to, or have access to, what is going on in the department is dependent upon a number of factors, including departmental ethos and information being available about current research thrusts.

4.The fourth source is the current research work or interests of individual staff or potential supervisors. This source can provide topics which staff, who are experienced in research, identify as meriting enquiry as well as being viable and feasible for student research. This is the principal source of topics for projects which are externally funded and for which an appointment as a research assistant may be an intrinsic part of the project. It is usually an expectation, if not a condition, that a person appointed as a Research Assistant will register for a research degree. In these cases, invariably the topic and, indeed, the whole project is required to be written up in detail before any funds are allocated and before the actual research student or assistant is appointed. In other words, it is usual for an appointment of this kind to be of an individual who 'fits' the project, not the other way round.

It is usually the case that topics arising from sources one and two, that is, the topics identified or proposed by the research students themselves, either from their own experience or from their understandings of the literature, can only be carried out either if they fall within the experiences and expertise of the supervisors who are available and who could be responsible for the supervision or if they can be 'massaged' in some way so that they do fall within the supervisors' interests and capabilities.

## Research Topics in the Arts and the Sciences

In general, the approaches to the identification of topics for student research differ between the fields of science and technology, on the one hand, and the arts and humanities, including art and design, on the other and it is illuminating to pick up on some of those differences. For a variety of reasons, relating to concepts of learning and the nature of knowledge, there are problems which are particular to the identification of research topics in the arts and humanities, not only in terms of the sources of topics for research but also about the extent to which responsibility for identifying the topic by the students themselves is seen as part of a research training.

In the fields of science and technology, the maps of knowledge seem to be so well identified and the unresolved questions so manifestly evident that it does not appear difficult to specify areas of potential research. Rarely do research students in these fields identify their own topics because such topics are , in the main, extensions of ongoing research in the departments in which they work. The CNAA Policy document, referred to before, noted that the 'choice of research degree projects is considerably influenced by the staff of the institution' (para 2.6.4) whilst the valuable pamphlet $R e \cdot$ search Student and Supervisor: An Approach to Good Supervisory Practice published by the SERC (1983) was unequivocal about supervisor involvement.

In some areas the student has no alternative but to accept one of the main ongoing lines of research within the department. In other areas the supervisor may have a general idea which it is possible to develop in various directions and here, at least with an able student, it is possible for the student himself to play a significant part in the final decision on the research topic (p8).

At research degree level, most of the topics put forward for research degree registration in these fields are highly specific, as experience of considerations in CNAA Research Degree Committees clearly shows. In many cases it is arguable as to whether or not the student being registered for the degree would, or could, actually understand all the implications of the research projects for which they are being registered. In these situations, acquiring knowledge of the specific topic field is taken to be a concomitant element of the research itself and not infrequently include in the identified programme of related study.

As noted earlier, it has been the practice in the arts and humanities, in taught courses as well as research degree research, to see the identification of the topic as being an important part of the research training. A not uncommon approach is for the research student to work from a broad area of personal interest and to seek researchable questions from within that area, gradually narrowing down to a specific research topic. This is often a lengthy process requiring a great deal of tutorial discussion — sometimes it seems more akin to Socratic dialogue. It would not be an understatement to say that reaching a point where a student has a resolved an acceptable research design can take longer than the actual carrying out of the research project itself. Although these deliberations are often rewarding experiences for both student and tutor, the process does raise the question as to whether or not it is based on an unrealistic expectation of student initiated research, on the one hand, and if it is as fruitful, in terms of research outcomes, as the limited resources of the field can justify, on the other. Almost every research student aspires to astound the world with an innovative insight - just as the typical Fine Art student aspires to making a unique contribution to cultural enrichment — in both cases their aspirations are rarely other than either wholly unjustified or seriously misguided.

It is axiomatic that research students, either as taught course students or research degree students, can only undertake research if they have topics to research. Always accepting that the two may be isomorphic, the distinction I am making is between research topics which are generated out of particular student interest and those which are part of a programme of research, such as may centre on the work of a department or a single supervisor. It is a bonus if the two are isomorphic. However, whilst there is no doubt that research students are better placed if they are able to identify with and feel a commitment towards the topic they are researching, such an identification does not necessarily depend upon the topics being initiated by the students.

## Student-Initiated Topics

Because student-initiated topics tend not to have their origins in a broader picture of ongoing research, the student is faced initially with the formidable but wholly necessary task of searching and describing the field within which the topic is located. Because it is an individual research, the student rarely has anyone with whom to discuss what he or she is doing apart from the supervisor who may or may not have a personal interest in the topic. No matter how well the study subsequently is carried out and reported, because it is a 'one-off' study, the research is invariably too limited in scale to allow generalisations to be made and, therefore, has limited potential value to the field. Another characteristic of such studies is that they also, almost without exception, leave many questions unanswered and are reliant upon some other researcher taking them up — which, of course, does not happen very often. The shelves of libraries are filled with inconclusive studies which no-one ever looks at.

## Collaborative Research

Despite the point made earlier about postgraduate research being primarily a research training, I believe that postgraduate student research can and should make a contribution to the body of knowledge constituting the field. This is more likely to occur when student research is part of a programme of research, where the individual topic can be seen to build upon existing research, forms a part of live ongoing research and can be seen as making a contribution to that live research. The values to the student of working in such a collaborative context in which others, including the supervisor, are working on other aspects of the same problem, would seem to be self-evident but not least that it helps to obviate the problem of loneliness which many researchers feel. Some years ago in my own institution, I established Research Colloquia to bring all research students together on a regular basis initially to reduce the feeling of isolation and to share their problems as well as their research activity. This has been extended and now the Colloquia not only provide opportunities for research students to present their own researches for the consideration of others but also allow them to develop a broader perspective on research by direct contact with invited distinguished and experienced researchers from this country and abroad.

Defining the parameters within which a student undertakes a research project increases the possibility of the research producing an outcome which can make a contribution to the field of knowledge. As a generalisation, I would prefer a student to carry out a piece of research which, although limited in scale, is thoroughly executed and with totally reliable results than one which, on the surface, may appear more imaginative but ends up inconclusively with more questions than it started with.

Although there will always be exceptions to the case, in my view, programmes of research are likely to be more productive and, in the end, be more satisfying as well as valuable to the student, than individual, 'one-off' student researches. Although this may seem antithetical to many of the learning approaches and the views of students in art and design, I believe that the more extensive development of such programmes, along with the involvement in them of students and staff as collaborators in clearly defined endeavours, is necessary if art and design research is to become more visible and productive than it is at the present. Again it is not an 'either-or', but I am making the point, which is particularly apposite to art and design, that one should not feel guilty about, or feel that one is stifling student creativity, by directing students to research topics. I have found that, in general, most students are highly appreciative of positive guidance in this way.

## The Nature of Programmes of Research

A programme of research, in the sense it is being used here, can take many forms but a common characteristic is that the individual researches contributing to it focus on different aspects of the same issue or build upon and extend or clarify questions raised within the programme. Some programmes are cumulative and emerge as a programme over time whereas others may map out the dimensions for enquiry from the beginning. In either case, a body of knowledge, expertise and experience is developed and provides a context within which researchers can have some confidence of support. An example of the former, that is, the cumulative programme, is the work with which I have been associated over the last twenty years on issues specifically related to the field of critical studies in art and design, which is one of my fields of interest. These studies have, I believe, gone some way to answering some of the questions which clearly need to be asked about the nature and development of critical ability (Hildred, 1971). It is not possible in the time available here to describe, in any kind of detail, the studies undertaken, but it may be of interest to outline some of the issues that have been addressed because, in my view, they demonstrate the kinds of relationships of ideas and topics which a programme can generate. As a consequence, they identify some of the most important educational aspects of critical studies in art and design.

Fundamental to criticism is the use of language, and not only have we been able to describe a wide range of critical concepts and, indeed, the vocabulary, used by teachers in the studio and classroom, children and professional critics (Moloney, 1984) but also to look at the development of the language of criticism in relation to general vocabulary and language use (Allison, 1974; Hickman, 1986) as well as to perceptual development (Jenkins, 1985). Along with this focus on language has been a considerable amount of work on the analysis of critical statements or appraisals made by students of different ages and in different circumstances (Simpson,

1973; Allison, 1974; Pearce, 1974; Kelsall, 1978; Sherry, 1983; Moloney, 1984; Rawding, 1984) and we have been able to arrive at some defensible measure of critical ability (Bougourd, 1985). It is of more than passing interest in the light of the current emphasis on monitoring performance to note that we have looked at the qualitative relationship between oral and written criticism (Baker, 1983). We have also studied the nature and variability of critical activity in art and design, including preferences for art and design worksia bil tial ability, art and design experience (Allison, 1974; Simpson, 1973), socio-economic backgrounds (Peppiate, 1969) and ethnic origins (Eldridge, 1984). Interwoven with these has been the development of specific teaching strategies designed to develop critical abilities in primary school children (Kelsall, 1978); and in secondary school children in relation to art history (Taylor, 1984), manmade objects in general (Simpson, 1973) and specifically in ceramics (Pearce, 1974). There has also been a focusing in on the formation and assessment of very specific concepts within design at secondary school level (Sherry, 1983) and in higher education (Bougourd, 1985). We have also gathered evidence onhe positive effect that engagement in critical activity has on art and design production (Kelsall, 1978). We have gone some way to understanding what is involved in critical thinking (Read, 1984) and current work is being carried out to arrive at a more adequate range of critical strategies which can be adopted by children and students to provide more enriched and meaningful experiences of art and design (Hutson, current; Simpson, current). There are, of course, many other issues which have been addressed with greater or smaller degrees of specificity, but what I consider to be important is that the work has been, firstly, firmly rll secondly, built upon and related to the work carried out by others and thirdly, as fully cognisant and reflective as possible of the work done elsewhere in this country and overseas.

## Collaboration in Research

Although programmes of research may originate with individuals they are, as indicated earlier, essentially collaborative endeavours. Whilst it is likely that research programmes will, to a large degree, be identifiable with institutions, I believe that, given clear channels of information and communication, it is possible to open up inter-institutional research programmes. This, of course, is already taking place to a limited extent but not to the degree which it could and, in any case, there is not sufficient information available about the work which is going on to facilitate that kind of development.

Information about and a description of the field of research in art and design is essential, not only so that the directions and extent of research, both nationally and within individual institutions, can be more clearly known but also so that new research can grow out of and build upon existing research rather than, as has sometimes been the case, unknowingly replicate it.

It is clear that, with only 65 CNAA research degrees in art and design having been awarded up to 1986, research in art and design, as compared with other fields, is still in its infancy. As a matter of interest, art and design research registrations constitute only four per cent of all CNAA research degree registrations. It would not, therefore, be difficult to describe the state of art and design research at this stage as far as CNAA research degrees are concerned. What is less easy is to develop a picture of the research which has been carried out in the 25 currently approved taught Master's degree courses, which I consider likely to be one of the most valuable indicators of the range and direction of current research. The time would seem to be opportune, therefore, to generate a definitive database of all completed postgraduate research in art and design carried out in both the maintained and university sectors which, once the procedures for data collection have been established, can be continually updated to act as a major resource for the field. With access to such information, not only would it be possible to identify research orientations and directions and, therefore, potential growth areas but many of the problems of topic identification and duplication, to some degree, might be overcome. It should also facilitate the identification of research programmes as well as reveal potentialities for inter-institutional collaboration. There is no doubt also that when institutional programmes of research are known to exist they attract individuals who want to work in those specialised areas. Many students and researchers, from this country and abroad, for example, have come to work in my institution simply because of the known experience and expertise, as well as resources, in particular areas of research, including the critical studies area referred to earlier.

## Development of the art and design research database

The volume of research in art and design is growing and it is important to be able to identify both the scale and directions it is taking. Previous editions of the Index of British Studies in Art and Design Education, which is a well-established and widely used database, have focused on describing the educational or pedagogic dimension of research in art and design. This was due not only to the tradition and consequent volume of research with that particular orientation but also because it more clearly followed the traditional research report paradigm. The

1986 edition, published by Gower Press, clearly demonstrates this orientation. However, there appears to be considerable enthusiasm and support for the Index to be extended to include all postgraduate art and design research in the forthcoming edition, so that a definitive picture of completed research will be available to researchers in all art and design fields, including art and design history. With the cooperation of the course leaders and supervisors, the Index will include research carried out in taught Master's degree courses in art and design as well as that completed for research degrees. As in the earlier edition, the Index will also include research in art and design which has been carried out other than for educational awards.

Although a great deal of the research work carried out in this country has been directed at particular local or national issues, the international dimension of art and design research is an important one. Over the last decade there has been increasing collaboration between researchers in art and design in different countries, most notably between those in England, Australia and North America. As a consequence, there is considerable overseas interest in the research in art and design being carried out in the UK and there is no doubt that this will increase with the development of the European Community. Making information about the kinds of art and design research being carried out in this country available to those in other countries will be an important contribution to international collaboration. The forthcoming edition of the Index, therefore, will not only provide the international research community with information about the kinds and directions of research being carried out in this country but will also enable researchers and potential research students to identify the particular research interests, strengths and experience of the individual institutions responsible for art and design research.

There are still some questions about the entries in the Index which need to be resolved. A database is not intended merely to be a record of what has been done, where and by whom, although that in itself has obvious values, but is intended, in effect, to be a directory of resources. One of the characteristics of research described at the beginning of this paper was that the outcomes of research, whatever forms they take, should be accessible to others. In order to be accessible, in the sense meant here, the outcomes of the research would need to be reported in a form which could be made available to others on request. This usually takes the form of a dissertation, report or published article but it could be that there are other accessible forms of presentation which are particular to specific art and design disciplines. Some Master's degree researches culminate in exhibitions, whereas others result in a particular product. What the record of these kinds of outcomes might be which render them 'accessible' to others so that they constitute a publically available contribution to the 'body of knowledge', is a question yet to be resolved. There are other matters of a similar kind which will need to be examined if the picture of research in art and design is to be adequate and complete.

## Summary

In this paper, a description of the patterns of research topic identification has been given and questions raised as to the value of student research topics. The case for extensions to the development of programmes of research was presented and it was argued that this was not only more realistic and educationally valuable in terms of student research training but that such programmes have the potential to make a direct contribution to the advance of research in art and design, both in national as well as institutional terms. The need for and the value of a coherent and comprehensive picture of research in all art and design disciplines was described and this was coupled with a report of proposed developments in the Index of British Studies in Art and Design Education. The international dimension of art and design research was discussed and importance was given to the need to make information about research endeavours in the UK available to the international research community. Some questions were raised as to the nature of reports of research in art and design and the extent to which they can be 'publically accessible'.

## References

Allison, B (1986). Index of British Studies in Art and Design Education. Aldershot: Gower.

Council for National Academic Awards (1984). Research and related activities: Policy Statement. London: CNAA.

SERC. Science and Engineering Research Council (1983). Research Student and Supervisor: An Approach to Good Practice. Swindon.

Unpublished Research Reports

Allison, B. (1974). Intellectual Factors in Art Education. PhD thesis, University of Reading.

Baker, P (1983). A Pilot Study to determine whether mode of response is a significant factor in researching children's appreciation of art works. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Bougourd J (1985). Critical Judgement of Dress: A study of critical skills of students on TEC Higher National Diploma in Clothing. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Eldridge, P (1985). Cultural Orientation and Aesthetic Functioning: A comparison of pupil response in three ethnic groups. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Hickman, R (1986). An investigation of language use in art and design education. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Hildred, M (1971). The nature and purpose of art appreciation within the curricula of secondary schools. Dip. Art. Educ. diss, Leeds Polytechnic.

Hudson, DG (current) A framework for visual education derived from the study of the interaction of art and society. PhD research, CNAA (Leicester Polytechnic)

Jenkins, S (1986). The contribution of a textile design curriculum on the development of tactile sensitivity. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Kelsall, RT (1978). An empirical study in the development of a teaching strategy designed to alter the appreciation of art and design by some primary school children. MPhil thesis, Leicester Polytechnic.

Moloney, KM (1984). Concept definition, analysis and assessment for art education, PhD thesis, Leicester Polytechnic.

Pearce, TS (1974). An investigation into the effects of a course of study on the abilities of some twelve year old children to respond to designed objects. Dip. Art. Educ. diss, Leeds Polytechnic.

Peppiate, D (1969). An investigation of the effects of home background of some grammar school children on the attitude to art and on the content of their art work. Dip. Art. Educ. diss, Leeds Polytechnic.

Rawding, M (1984). Irony in the Visual Arts: An exploratory investigation of interpretive abilities in 10-13 year old pupils. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Read, W (1984). An investigation into the concept of critical thinking and how the nature of its relationship with design education might be explored. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Sherry, S (1983). An experimental teaching strategy planned to develop levels of discerment and discrimination of some secondary school children towards the functional aspects of man-made objects. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

Simpson, TF (1973). An experimental teaching strategy designed to alter the response of some secondary school children to various aspects of design. Dip. Art. Educ. diss, Leeds Polytechnic.

Simpson, TF (current). The formulation of instruments designed to facilitate the description, analysis and evaluation of verbal responses to objects and phenomena of art and design. PhD research, Ohio State University (Leicester Polytechnic).

Taylor, P (1984). The development of an experimental teaching programme for art history education and its effects on some comprehensive school students. MA diss, Leicester Polytechnic.

# TRENTHAM BOOKS FOR DESIGN TECHNOLOGY

The Best of Craft, Design and Technology Edited by John Eggleston

Studies in Design Education and Technology has just celebrated its twentieth anniversary. In 20 years of continuous publication this internationally famous journal has published many of the most influential articles on new trends in craft, design and technology. It has played a major part in the transformation of the subject to the central position it now occupies in the school curriculum. A selection of these articles on curriculum innovation and development, assessment, examinations, management, teacher training, primary schools initiatives and the fundamental aims and purposes of the subject are included. Essential reading for all concerned with CDT — Times Education Supplement

ISBN: 0 94800 19 1. Price: £14.95. 252 pages, A4

## Craft, Design and Technology: Past, Present and Future John Penfold

In little over a decade Design and Technology has become one of the most expansive and expensive subjects in the secondary curriculum. What has brought about this transformation? This hard-hitting, sometimes irreverent critique - a challenging polemic — examines, within an historical context, the pressures for change and assesses the prospects for future development. Essential reading for all those professionally involved and for a wider public interested in education and industry links.

Essential reading for all those professionally involved and for a wider public interested in education and industry links — Technology in Education

ISBN: 0 948080 11 6. Price: £9.95, 162 pages A5

Trentham Books Limited 151 Etruria Road, Stoke-on-Trent, England ST1 5NS

Telephone 0782 274227 with payment, official order, or ACCESS/VISA