> 来源：Rethinking Design Thinking Part II (Kimbell, Lucy)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Rethinking Design Thinking Part II (Kimbell, Lucy)\Rethinking Design Thinking Part II (Kimbell, Lucy).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Rethinking Design Thinking: Part II

Lucy Kimbell is Associate Fellow, Saïd Business School, University of Oxford and Head of Social Design at the Young Foundation, London. She has taught design practices to MBA students since 2005, having previously taught interaction design at the Royal College of Art,   
London. Her main focus is designing services in the context of public policy. hello@lucykimbell.com

Lucy Kimbell

ABSTRACT This paper uses resources from anthropology and science and technology studies to propose understanding design expertise and activity as constituted materially and discursively in practice. Introducing a pair of concepts – designas-practice and designs-in-practice – as an analytical device for discussing design solves a number of problems facing researchers working in design studies. First, it helps researchers see design as a situated, local accomplishment involving diverse and multiple actors. Second, it acknowledges the roles of objects in constituting practices. Third, it de-centers the designer as the main agent in designing. This approach moves away from a disembodied, ahistorical design thinking to a situated, contingent set of practices carried by professional designers and those who engage with designs, which recognizes the materiality of designed things and the material and discursive practices through which they come to matter.

KEYWORDS: design thinking, practices, designers, innovation, organization design

## Introduction

Accounts of design thinking often hinge on descriptions of the ways designers do things. Researchers do not have direct access to what goes on in designers’ minds, so they are left with what they believe is going on as they seek to describe and explain designers’ thinking. One striking story comes from management researchers Dick Boland and Fred Collopy (2004), reflecting on their experience of working with architects from Frank Gehry’s firm designing the new building for their business school. Having spent two days with the architects revising the arrangement of space in the new building, Boland and Collopy describe how the project lead Matt Fineout tears up the plans they have just agreed on. He suggests they start again, now they know they can solve the problem (Boland and Collopy 2004: 5).

Even in this short description, Boland and Collopy draw our attention to practice: the architects’ tacit and embodied knowledge, their bodily and mental activities, what structures their professional work and makes particular behaviors possible, and how it feels. These ways of working startle the management professors, since tearing up plans is not part of the routines within their work culture. Boland and Collopy’s account draws attention to the embodied, shared experience of working around a table on sheets of onionskin, making marks, and discussing how the building should be designed. Reading it, one can feel the authors’ visceral response to seeing the architect destroy what they have all just created together. For this architect, design is not simply problem solving since in this story, he tears up a viable solution. For Boland and Collopy, this experience helps them identify a distinctive “design attitude” to describe how designers do not just choose between alternatives, but generate entirely new concepts. But this account also captures the material and discursive practices in contemporary design professions. It may be possible to identify a distinctive kind of “design thinking.” But perhaps more interestingly, we might attend to the material and discursive practices in which designers of particular kinds do, know, and say particular things and how they come to do, know, and say these things but not others. In so doing we might develop a richer understanding of professional design and its effects.

At a time when the term design thinking has become more common outside of professional design, in particular within management fields (Brown 2009; Martin 2009; Kimbell 2011), this paper explores what theories of practice can bring to understanding professional designers and the cultures in which they have expertise. The main contribution is to propose a new analytical device for discussing design based in theories of practice. It conceives of design activity as linking both what designers do, know, and say, with what endusers and other stakeholders do, know, and say, acknowledging the materials and objects involved in practices and at the same time attending to the discursive practices that make possible particular ways of doing, knowing, and saying. A decade after Victor Margolin’s (2002) call for studies of design as a cultural practice, the paper’s distinctive feature is to propose shifting the level of analysis in research away from individuals to practices, conceived of as a nexus of minds, bodies, things, and the institutional arrangements within which designs and their users are constituted (Reckwitz 2002).

First I review research influenced by anthropology, science and technology studies, and philosophy that views the world in terms of practices. Drawing on the work of Wanda Orlikowski (2000), Theodore Schatzki (Schatzki et al. 2001), Andreas Reckwitz (2002), Mark Hartswood et al. (2002), Lucy Suchman (2003), Elizabeth Shove (Shove 2011; Shove and Pantzar 2005), Karen Barad (2007), Tony Fry (2007, 2009), and others, I identify concepts that help illuminate the material and discursive practices within which professional design is constituted. I then propose a new way of conceiving of design activity. This highlights the practices that constitute designs, designers’ work, and their expertise. I introduce a pair of concepts to describe designing: design-as-practice and designs-in-practice.

This pair of concepts solves a number of problems facing researchers analyzing design activity. These include maintaining dualisms between thinking and doing; ignoring the particular contingencies that shape the emergence of design practices; and relying predominantly on the agency of designers to understand design even though other factors, such as non-human actors, are involved in constituting practices (Barad 2007; Harman 2009). I then briefly illustrate the two concepts using research from an ethnographic study of professional designers. The paper concludes with a discussion of the implications for researchers and educators with an interest in design and designers, and limitations of the approach.

Although the term design thinking may be moving on from its time in the spotlight according to some commentators (e.g. Walters 2011), there remains an important task: to describe and explain doing and knowing within design and the particular expertise of design professionals (e.g. Cross 2004, 2006; Lawson and Dorst 2009). We need to understand what effects designers can have within the different projects, organizations, and communities within which they work. The paper’s contribution is to use theories of practice in order to advance understanding about designers’ work, moving away from a disembodied, ahistorical design thinking to a situated, contingent set of practices carried by professional designers and those who engage with designs, which recognizes the materiality of designed things and how they come to matter.
