> 来源：The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colors And Their Applications to the Arts (Michel E. Chevreul)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colors And Their Applications to the Arts (Michel E. Chevreul)\The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colors And Their Applications to the Arts (Michel E. Chevreul).md
> 识别方式：一级强章节标记

# CHAPTER V.

## PRINCIPLE oF VARIETY.

(906.) WHeneveR man seeks distraction from without, whether the pleasures of meditation are unknown to him, or thought fatigues him for a time, he feels the necessity of seeing a variety of objects. In the first case, he goes in quest of excitement, in order to escape from ennui; in the second he is desirous of diverting his thoughts, at least for a time, into another channel. In both cases man flies monotony; a variety of external objects is what he desires. Finally, the artist, the enlightened amateur, and less cultivated minds, all seek variety in works of art and nature.

(907.) It is to satisfy this want that various colours in objects please more than a single colour, at least when these objects occupy & certain space; that our monuments have many accessory parts which are only ornaments; that in furniture we use many things which, without being useful strictly speaking, please by their elegance of form, their colours, their brilliancy, &c. Assuredly, as I have endeavoured to show, it is tho principle of variety which forms the cssential distinction between landscape gardening and French gardening; for, as I have before said (819.), whoever walks in the former will notice objects disposed so as to excite in him, as far as possible, new seneations; whilst in the latter, be will find himself affected by a singlo and continuous impression ; but I will add that, if this garden is of large and fine proportions, an idea of grandeur, pcrhaps even of sublimity, will be excited rather than by the landscape garden, which produces, especially on Frenchmen, an idea of the beautiful. In fact, the idea of the grand and of the sublime, determined by the eye, always reposes upon an idea of noble and majestic grandeur, and hence are engendered a succession of other idens, which only connect themsolves with the external and actually visible world through the medium of the first. Such are the idcas of immensity, of boundless space, of the infinite, which are awakened in us by the view of the heavens sprinkled with brilliant stars in a dark night; such are also thoidea of space uggested by the sight of the sea; the idea of force or power which gives motion to its waters; the idea of time or of succession, presented by the sight of waves which, each in its turn, break on the shore; the ideas relating to astronomy, and to navigation. Finally, such is the affinity even of these great ideas with the weakness of the being who, however, is able to conceive them !

The idea of the beautiful, determined by sight, results from a certain ensemble of varied and harmonious ideas, always more or less immediately oonnected with the objects that have occasioned them, so that this idea, resting on the contemplation of a certain number of affinities, which the eye perceives in a completely finished object, the mind is no longer under the impression of a single quality, or of a spectacle which, but little varied, while vast, suggests the idea of infinity. It is assuredly this idea of the infinite springing up in a solitude at the sight of a ruin, which renders such a sight more attractive to many minds than the finest modern structure; in fact, the sight of the latter does not, like the former, transport the imagination back to those distant times when this solitude was covered with structures, to lead it on to the conception that a day may perhaps arrive when the great monuments of the nation will be ruins! . . I am not astonished that a man given up to meditation, and admiring the age of Louis XIV. (938.), should prefer thoso masses of trees at Versailles, so skilfully arranged at a suitable distance from the palace, to the best-arranged landscape garden elsewhere, which can never offer to tho sight the imposing harmony of Lenôtre's composition. For, seen from the western façadc, these gardens possess & grandeur which results from the fact of the eye discovering only dependent portions of a vast and unique composition. The space to the right and left of the spectator may perhaps appear confined, but by masses of vegetation in front it has all the vastness that may be desired, since the surface of tho ground is bounded only by the horizon. If the lover of variety should blame the monotony of this view, and should discover some truth in the Duc de St. Simon's opinion of Versailles, in despite of the very evident bias of its intelligent author, the lorer of the grand will always admire the aspect of a powerful unity, which agrees so completcly with all that we know of the court and of the person of Louis XIv. While I attach so much importance to the French garden, I must avow a preference for landscape gardening in every, or nearly every case, in which a private person wishes to lay out his grounds. It is also in this point of view that the interior of a Gothic church with painted windows, admitting of fewer varied ornaments than the interior of churches with plain glass windows (573.), seems to me more favourable than the second to the power and unity of religious contemplation.

(908.) If the principle of variety recommends itself because it is contrary to monotony, in its applications it should be carefully restrained, because, even without falling into confusion, effects may be produced far less agreeable than if they had been more simple. One thing with which I have been forcibly struck, and which I have had frequent occasions of remarking in the associations of colours I have made is, that although I employed coloured circles of an equal size placed in rectilineal series at the same distance from one another, that is to say in conditions the most favourable to a distinct view (933. and following) I have observed that in employing more than three different colours, exclusive of white, black, and grey, the effect of the series was less satisfactory than when only two colours, properly combinod with black or white, were employed; such is the reason for my preference of two colours to three in military uniforms.

It is also for this reason that plants composing a single line should not be much varied, and that everything which tends to group different objects, so as to render them more easy to be grasped, exercises a happy influence upon optical effects.

## CHAPTER VI.

## PRINCIPLE OF SYMMETRY.

(9.) Ir s very probable that our organisation, combining as it does two parts paired as identically as is possible in an organised being, enters very much into the pleasure that we obtain from the sight of symmetrical objects.

910.There areobjects whic it is necessary to prosent to the eye perfectly symmetrical, either because they are so essentially,  a vertebrated animal (mammal, bird, reptile, fish), a radiated animal (star-fish, sea-urchin), or because symmetry pleases us in the form of an object of art which we sec isolated, as a column, a pyramid, a triumphal arch, a temple, &c.; and I may here remark that Gothic churches are, for the most part, constructed upon a symmetrical plan. Symmetry pleases also in a circular or elliptical border of fowers, the whole of which the eye takes in at a single glance (755. [A. b.], page 272.).

Finally, a symmetrical disposition should be observed in the arrangement of many objects grouped around or before a principal object, as the arraugement of such a garden as that of tho Tuilerics, which has a breadth equal to the façade of the palace, or the arrangement of a much vaster garden which is co-ordinate to & great palace, such as that at Versailles.

(911.) When a whole is subdivided into symmetrical parts of a definite extent, we can, in many cases, without injury to the whole, vary cach part without going beyond the point at which discord would arise betwcen them. This is what has been done in the park at Versailles, with a portion called le miroir, a charming garden, when it is planted with flowers properly assorted.

(912.) The principle of symmetry appears to me valuable for obtaining a general effect from many objects analogous, but differing amongst themselves, like the varieties of one species, or cogencral species, or even species of neighbouring genera, bclonging to the same family.

(913.) If there are objects to which a symmetrical form is suitcd, to the exclusion of every other if there are grounds which must be laid out symmetrically, in order to connect vegetable nature with & grand architectonic composition,— there are also objects to which the symmetrical form is not so essential but that it can be dispensed with, and thero are grounds whicb it is more suitable to lay out on the system of landscape-gardening than according to the principle of symmetry, even when it is not designed for the sake of gratifying a taste for variety.

For example, whenever a mass of objects cannot be embraced at a single glance, because they occupy too much space,—or when ground which is made of planes differently placed in regard to one another, also even when this ground, being flat, is very irregular, and the buildings upon it are not placed as they should be, in a symmetrical composition,— it is convenient to throw aside the principle, not to carry out a system of irregularity, but to attain a pleasing distribution of objects, and even to have parts which, considered in detail, will appear less irregular than they would bave done as a whole, if confined to a single plane.

(914.) It is in conformity with these ideas that we bave subordinated the planting of masses in landscape-gardening to principles which are very distinct from those absolute ideas of irregularity which some people maintain.
