> 来源：The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Cotton

As significant as this complementarity between linen and cotton was the developing connection between calico printing and cotton, for a large part of the origin of great demand for cotton textiles in the eighteenth century can be explained by the enormous popularity of the fashion for printed fabrics which emerged in the later seventeenth century. Calico printing, originally established in Egypt, was soon relocated to the main importing centres for London—Amsterdam and Marseilles. It was carried across Western Europe by the Huguenots and was soon also found throughout Eastern Europe. And the British industry, except for the luxury end of the market, soon migrated from the metropolis to the provinces. Chapman and Chassagne have recently demonstrated the significance of the stimulus provided by this industry. By 1792 nearly a million pieces of white cotton cloth were produced in Britain, of which 60 per cent were sent to the printer’s. Calico-printing workshops were effectively ‘proto-factories’, a ‘transitional stage in evolution from dispersed domestic manufacture to the factory system’; and a number of leading calico printers were associated with the introduction of mechanized spinning and weaving.2

Although calico printing was prohibited in Britain in 1720, printing on linen or cottonlinen mixture was a popular alternative, and the cotton industry soon grew out of the linen or linen mixtures industry. In mid-eighteenth-century Lancashire, a master ‘put out’ linen yarn for the warp and cotton weft in cops. The spinning was arranged by the merchant or carried out by the weaver’s family, and cotton spinning formed the part-time activity of most women of the labouring classes. In Scotland, the weavers of Paisley and Glasgow, already skilled in the production of fine linens, easily turned their hands to fine cottons, notably the Paisley shawls. In the 1770s several thousand looms in the Glasgow area were producing linens, silks, cambrics and lawns; they changed over by the end of the century to fine cottons.28 Glasgow concentrated on plain and printed muslins and Paisley on fancy fabrics. In Lancashire spinning spread early in the south around Manchester, while weaving was done on handlooms in the north-east corner of the county.29 The impact of the production of calicoes and muslins was described in 1785 in MacPherson’s Annals of Commerce.

A handsome cotton gown was not attainable by women in humble circumstances, and thence the cottons were mixed with linen yarns to reduce their price. But now cotton yarn is cheaper than linen yarn, and cotton goods are very much used in place of cambrics, lawns and other expensive fabrics of flax; and they have almost totally superseded the silks. Women of all ranks, from the highest to the lowest, are clothed in British manufactures of cotton…the ingenuity of the calico printers has kept pace with the ingenuity of the weavers and others concerned in the preceding stages of the manufacture, and produced patterns of printed goods which, for elegance of drawing, far exceed anything that ever was imported; and for durability of colour, for generally they stand the washing as well as to appear fresh and new every time they are washed, and give an air of neatness and cleanliness to the wearer beyond the elegance of silk in the first freshness of its transitory lustre.30

By the end of the eighteenth century the geographical distribution of most of the main textile industries had undergone great change. Yorkshire now dominated the woollen and worsted industries, though Norfolk and the West Country remained in a strong yet static position. Knitting was now centred on the East Midlands, particularly Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire after framework knitting had shifted out of London, and the formerly widespread country handknitting industry was now more localized in the North and in Scotland. Silk remained a small luxury industry, though organized then along highly capitalistic lines, and received a new fillip in the eighteenth century with the expansion of weaving in London, and later ribbon weaving in Coventry. Linen and cotton became highly concentrated—the one in Scotland and Ireland, the other in Lancashire and Scotland. All the branches of the textile industry in fact went through significant phases of expansion in the eighteenth century, but the remarkable spurt of the cotton industry was unique and soon cast the respectable performances of its predecessors into shadow.

## EARLY WORK ORGANIZATION

The organization of production in the early stages of the different textile industries shaped their subsequent paths into industrialization. Elucidating the variety of industrial structures prompts us to seek out the reasons for difference. Mercantile capital intervened in all these industries, but with very different implications for organization. There was in some industries a straightforward correlation between capitalist control, frequently in the form of concentrated ownership, and putting-out systems. But other industries, while using mercantile networks, were run by independent small clothiers who preserved artisan structures. What contributed to the fragility or resilience of these proto-industrial structures? Why did capitalist control intervene more effectively in some, but not others, of these textile industries? The answers to these questions may lie to some extent in costs of production or market structures. But they are likely to lie at least as much in social structure and institutions.
