> 来源：The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Wool and worsted

At the beginning of our period, the wool and worsted industries in both the West Country and Yorkshire contained an abundance of small clothiers. Julia Mann has argued that until the last half of the eighteenth century the small clothiers of the West Country were a significant part of the local social structure. There was no rigid dividing line between these and other workers; they went poaching in company with cordwainers, shearmen, bakers and glaziers; shopkeepers often carried on a little clothmaking.31 Heaton describes the textile class of seventeenth-century Yorkshire as mainly small clothiers making one piece of cloth a week and living hand to mouth. There were also yeomen who combined agriculture and industry, either making or finishing cloth, and then there were the large clothiers whose chief interest was cloth manufacture. They were mainly found in the villages near Leeds, where they also kept gardens, orchards and closes for animals. They kept a full set of clothmaking utensils and employed journeymen, women and apprentices. The larger clothiers often bought pieces from small men and sold these along with the cloth of their own manufacture to merchants from London and Yorkshire. The cloth was then taken once or twice a week to the open markets in Leeds, Halifax or Wakefield, or sent in cargoes to Blackwell Hall or Bartholomew Fair. The small clothier’s establishment was largely determined by the size of the labour force needed to make a piece of cloth; in the case of the kersey manufacture it took six people sorting, carding, spinning, weaving and shearing for one week to produce one finished but undyed piece.32

During the course of the eighteenth century a division arose in Yorkshire between the woollen and worsted branches. The small independent wool clothiers remained much as they had been in the seventeenth century. The father went to market and bought the wool; the wife and children carded and spun it, and some of the wool was put out to be spun in neighbouring cottages. With the help of his sons, apprentices or journeymen, the clothier then dyed the wool, wove it, took it to the fulling mill, and then to his stall in the market. He produced only one or two pieces a week, and kept between three and fifteen acres of land. Some had a horse or ass to carry their burden to market; others carried the pieces on their head or shoulders. It still only cost between £100 and £150 to start out, and the system of open marketing placed the small producer on equal terms with the large.33

But this division between wool and worsted was regional before it was industrial. In the more populous areas of the West Riding, especially in the area near to Halifax which was soon to turn to the worsted manufacture, Defoe found the cloth industry organized in a highly sophisticated combination of domestic and workshop manufacture. He found the country ‘one continued village’ with hardly a house standing out of speaking distance from another; ‘at almost every house there was a tenter and almost on every tenter a piece of cloth, or kersey or shalloon’. For two to three miles in almost every direction ‘look which way we would, high to the tops, and low to the bottoms, it was all the same; innumerable houses and tenters, and a white piece upon every tenter’.

Among the manufacturers’ houses are likewise scattered an infinite number of cottages or small dwellings, in which dwell the workmen which are employed, the women and children of whom are always busy carding, spinning etc.…this is the reason also why we saw so few people without doors, but if we knocked at the door of any of the master manufacturers, we presently saw a houseful of lusty fellows, some at the dye-fat, some dressing the cloths, some in the loom, some one thing, some another, all hard at work.34

The worsted manufacture, based on combed rather than carded long-fibred wool, was organized in Yorkshire on a much more capitalistic basis right from the outset. There the small independent clothier never existed; instead there were merchant-manufacturers who resembled the large West of England clothiers. They bought large quantities of wool at big fairs and put it out over a wide area to be spun and woven. The open marketing at the Leeds cloth hall with over 1,000 stallholders was in sharp contrast to the concentrated industrial structure indicated by the worsted hall at Bradford with its 250 stallholders. The Yorkshire worsted manufacturers ran extensive putting-out networks, commonly distributing wool within a radius of twenty to thirty miles. Woolpacks were often consigned to shopkeepers or small farmers who received a sum for delivering and receiving wool and spun hanks of yarn. ‘The mother or head of the family then plucked the tops into pieces the length of the wool, and gave it to the different branches of the family to spin about nine or ten hanks a day.’ 35

Capitalistic structures were, however, by no means necessary features of the worsted manufacture, for in Norfolk independent craftsmen prevailed. In Norwich the weaver was the pivot of the industrial structure. He bought yarn from independent spinners and wove it by himself or with his journey-men who worked either on commission or on the weaver’s premises. The cloth was then put out to independent cloth finishers, and afterwards sold locally to drapers or sent to London. Neither, for that matter, were artisan structures natural to the woollen industry. The West Country by mid-century was the living example to contemporaries of monopoly and capitalist putting-out systems.3

The sharp contrast between the artisan and capitalist structures of wool and worsted in Yorkshire, of worsted in Norfolk and Yorkshire, and wool in Yorkshire and the West Country cannot be attributed to natural differences in the industries. Neither do such differences account for the early appearance of mills and factories in the different textile manufactures. Mills existed in both industries from the early eighteenth century. And artisan and capitalist alike both made use of water-powered factories, or at least mills. Such mills were used for specific processes of manufacture and were generally incorporated into existing artisan and putting-out structures. Water-powered fulling mills existed from early times, but these were not regarded as factories.37

Do labour costs help to explain the different structures of wool and worsted? This seems unlikely, for labour costs were said to be lower in Norfolk than in the West Country, and they were lower in turn in Yorkshire’s worsted manufacture. Putting-out systems prevailed in both the West Country and the West Yorkshire worsted manufacture in spite of different labour costs. Markets, to be sure, favoured the new over the old: first worsteds in Norfolk, then those in Yorkshire; and Yorkshire’s wool over the West Country’s. Guild, corporate or landed regulations played their part in all three regions, but with different results. Putting-out systems in West Country wool and Yorkshire worsted probably owed much of their origin to concentrated ownership; and the local origins of such concentration go back in turn to a range of structural and circumstantial social factors peculiar to each region.
