> 来源：The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg)\The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820 - Industry, Innovation and Work in Britain (Dr Maxine Berg).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Linen and cotton

The linen industry was first and foremost a home occupation, widely practised, even after its commercialization, as a basic part of household duties. Never defined as a skilled occupation, it was largely assumed to be a women’s preserve. Much of the domestic English linen manufacture was submerged in private family production and use. In Scotland, too, ‘Many of the Scotch ladies are good housewives, and many gentlemen of good estate are not ashamed to wear the clothes of their wives and servants’ spinning.’47

While putting-out systems went hand in hand with industrial concentration in the other textile branches examined thus far, the cotton manufacture tells a different story. Here, from its earliest days, a putting-out type of organization emerged in a more dispersed industrial structure. Cotton’s organization was affected by that of its predecessor, fustian. This was a mixed cotton and linen cloth. It was a minor cloth until the mid-eighteenth century, but the rural workers producing it were more caught up in capitalist relations than either linen workers or many wool producers. By the middle of the eighteenth century there was systematic intervention by middlemen and a developed putting-out system, but large merchants did not control the markets or prices of yarn. Fustian masters appeared in the middle of the century. These gave out raw cotton and linen thread to the workers, then sold the cloth so produced to merchants. It seems probable that this prevalence of the small yeoman capitalist was an important factor in the successful growth of the Lancashire cotton trade. He could obtain credit or mortgage his land and become a putter-out. From here he could rise to become a small-scale employer of weavers and thence to the status of merchant.48 These fustian masters or factors were generally responsible for a large body of small weavers over a wide geographical area. The system had advantages, for the factors did most of the ‘managing’ of the industry, leaving merchants to concentrate on selling.49 In spite of this putting-out structure, however, the organization of the industry was hindered by the large number of middlemen, the seasonal labour in agricultural districts, and the delays caused by the small scale of production.50

The rise of some of the really big cotton masters and their innovation of the early factory system were closely bound up with the profits of fashion to be gained in calico printing. When calico printing moved beyond London to Lancashire in the mideighteenth century, those who took up the business were drawn from the same stratum of society as the cotton spinners, flax spinners and merchants—‘the chapmen or dealers in linen or cotton cloth known as Blackburn Greys’. It was the middlemen suppliers to the Blackburn merchant houses—the Claytons, Liveseys, Peels, Howarths and others—who started out in workshops which grew rapidly in size and efficiency. Peel had early connections with carding and spinning innovations through one of his spinners, Hargreaves, and pressured him into giving up the secret of his invention. Arkwright too was closely involved with calico printing. The increase in the demand for calico to produce the extremely popular printed cloth must have brought great pressure on the cotton spinners. In fact, as Chapman has shown, Peel devoted years to producing the finest possible fabrics for calico printing. He experimented with carding, roving and spinning machinery, building up his own team of artisans to build the machines. By the 1780s fine spinning was virtually an integral part of calico printing so that most manufacturers were calling themselves ‘calico muslin manufacturers’ or ‘calico printers and muslin manufacturers’. And by the 1790s the spread of calico printing was putting a strain on the output of handloom weavers, so that it now became the general practice for manufacturers ‘to establish their weaving…in all the little villages about [their works] in some of which they put a manager and take apprentices and also give out work to the inhabitants at their houses’.51

The calico-printing workshops, or ‘proto-factories’, formed a nucleus for a series of other workshops gathering together hand technologies, and the cotton industry developed through a combination of dispersed and concentrated, factory and putting-out, forms of production employing a complementarity of mechanized and hand technologies. When Arkwright’s water-frame mills started to appear, there already existed small but much more widespread jenny factories and small carding factories preparing cotton for home spinning.52 But in spite of factories, a substantial amount of spinning, both of high and low counts, was still carried out at home, or in very small factories. Some of these sold their yarn to the larger spinning factories, bridging any gaps during cyclical, technical or labour disruptions.53

Where industrial concentration, not production costs or markets, accounted for the predominance of putting-out networks in Yorkshire worsteds and framework knitting, this was not apparently the case in the early days of the cotton manufacture. Here, the market and pre-existing mercantile networks appear to have played the vital role in introducing a new product. Hence the production of this new material was diffused through the putting-out networks of the commercial linen and calico-printing industries. Capitalistic structures came with the new product; they were not imposed upon it. But the market opportunities created by a new product also entailed more open ownership and easier entry than did the concentrated putting-out systems of older textile sectors. This openness was also clearly related to regional social and institutional structures—the absence of corporate regulation over most of the cotton region, and the opportunities for population increase without the widespread poverty experienced in the East Midlands.

## IMPACT OF SOCIAL STRUCTURE

The proto-industrialization of the British textile industries in the eighteenth century was thus no single-minded progression, for the starting points of each industry spanned the whole spectrum of work organization. The classic early pattern, combining small independent artisans with agriculture and textiles, existed in some branches of the woollen industry, notably in Yorkshire, but not so much in the West Country; it existed in handknitting and some early framework knitting, and in linen. Some of the textile industries were, however, much more capitalistic, if not at the start then certainly by the middle of the eighteenth century. Putting-out and centralized processes prevailed from early on in the Yorkshire worsted manufacture, in the fustian manufacture, in framework knitting, silk throwing, calico printing and cotton.

Why were these structures so different even before the onset of severe pressures from technical change and capitalist competition at the end of the eighteenth century? The origins of these differences lie in several factors. The market played its part, and so did technology. But most influence was exercised by regional and industrial social structures, social structures which went back to the very character of feudalism and the origins of agrarian capitalism.

In the silk industry and in calico printing, a luxury market and traditional urban artisanal social structures encouraged a paradoxical combination of capitalistic organization and guild controls. Silk mills and calico-printing workshops were among the most advanced of early factories. But the strength of guild regulations helped to create metropolitan and provincial town and country divisions in both calico printing and silk weaving; divisions which were reflected in the quality of output and the labour force.

The putting-out system prevailed in the Yorkshire worsted industry, the West Country woollen industry, the Midlands framework-knitting industry, and the early cotton industry. The reason again lay largely in local social structures. This is clearest in the divide between the artisan woollen region and the putting-out worsted regions of Yorkshire.

Overpopulated pastoral regions marked by social division also help to account for the social structure of the framework-knitting industry. By the mid-eighteenth century the cost of frames combined with a relatively poor workforce to make for the easy concentration of frames in the hands of putting-out masters. This capitalist concentration and a large, flexible and weakened labour force created ideal conditions for the proliferation of capitalist structures of work organization. Internal control over the size of their labour forces prevented the growth of such capitalistic structures in industries such as the Yorkshire woollen sector and the Coventry silk-weaving trade. Coventry’s weavers were protected by a ring of common land over which all master weavers had a right of pasture. This restricted the growth of the town and reinforced the strength of the urban weavers. 54

What is remarkable is that textiles, the group of industries always singled out as the leader of the Industrial Revolution, and the prototype of advanced factory organization, should not only have started with multifarious forms of work organization, but should have retained these throughout the period of industrialization. Even by the 1820s only some stages of a few of these textile industries relied on factory organization and mechanized power technologies. The significance of these processes and industries, as in cotton spinning, should not, of course, go unrecognized. But it was still the case that decentralized, workshop, artisan and putting-out systems were successful and profitable, and in addition a substantial degree of technological change was compatible with these structures.

## ROAD TO THE FACTORY SYSTEM

The artisan systems, putting-out networks and different types of early factories were all transformed over the course of the late eighteenth and the first years of the nineteenth century. The textile manufactures constituted the industry par excellence in that largescale technical change that we call the Industrial Revolution. But it was competition and capitalist pressures, and not new technology itself, which accounted for the new forms of work organization evolving by the end of the eighteenth century. Some of the older types of work organization did develop into a factory system; others never did. Instead they developed their own valid and competitive forms or went into industrial decline. Technological development, on its own, did not have a great deal to do with the outcome. Many of the new techniques developed in the latter half of the eighteenth century could have been adopted across several systems of work organization. Yet some were adopted in only one of the forms they might have taken. This was the case with the development of the water frame and calico-printing techniques inside a factory system. We will discuss their cases more fully in the next chapter. But equally, the development of new technology in this period did not just mean mechanized, power-using techniques. It also included labour-intensive technologies and improvements in hand technologies which could be used in either domestic or factory production.

The particular technological developments of the various textile manufactures and the problems of their reception and diffusion merit a separate discussion, but here we shall concentrate on the historical development of the industrial structure of the textile industries. What happened to the artisan workshops, the putting-out systems and the cooperative factories by the time that the Industrial Revolution reached its peak?
