> 来源：Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

# Agency and modernization in the Soviet home

"The characteristics of the contemporary dwelling have been almost entirely transformed," announce Sovetskaia torgovlia (Sovie Tradein 1961Everything that surrounds us in our everyday lives has been modernized (modernizirovali). Simple, strict lines, the harmonious combination of colours and forms — that's what distinguishes today's tastefully furnished apartment."1

In the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev — no less than in the West in the postwar period — the modern home and household consumption associated with it became a key site for the concrete projection of "tomorrow" and for the construction of the identity of the citizen of that bright future. Housing vividly demonstrated the regime's renewed commitment to realizing the promises of the Revolution on a mass scale and to achieving high living standards for all. Whole new urban regions of prefabricated housing, rising rapidly on the edges of Soviet cities in the late 1950s as the result of an intensive mass housing drive launched in 1957, were at once a highly visible symbolic pledge of future communism and a means to bring it about. All the media, including the newest, television, proclaimed the successes of the housing campaign. Mass, illustrated magazines filled pages with photographs of cranes dramatically swinging suspended prefabricated panels or, later, whole apartment units into place. They marvelled at the scale and rapidity of construction and at the new industrial methods that made this possible. Above all, they emphasized modernity: the joyous "shock of the new" was a constant motif of such reportage. Television features and photojournalism celebrated the profound changes in the physical environment taking place "as if before one's eyes," and gasped at the overnight disappearance of familiar routes and landmarks as areas of small, wooden housing (once people's homes!) were erased to make way for new urban microregions. Where, yesterday, had been a wasteland on the edge of the city, today there were streets and yards where children played.3

Beyond the panorama of the mushrooming urban landscape, the media panned in to focus on the "typical" individual experience of taking up occupancy in the new flats and making them into homes. Photographs of construction sites were accompanied by texts that took the reader inside the prefabricated walls to learn how to go about furnishing her own "new-type," small scale, one-family apartment.4 The implication for individual lives of the reinvigorated project of constructing communism was represented in public culture by the transformative, ritual moment of novosel'e (house-warming). This was a common, popular experience; but unlike public festivals and mass celebrations such as the anniversary of the Revolution, it was not to be enjoyed en masse, in public space, but by individuals with their families and invited friends in their own homes.

Home presents a particularly intriguing space for study in an authoritarian, modernizing state with a centrally planned economy. For it is often seen as marking the limit of the state and its projects — the "borders of socialism," to borrow the title of Lewis Siegelbaum's recent edited volume on the problem of the elusive Soviet "private sphere."5 At best a paradoxical and unpromising site for building socialist modernity, there the cogs of the daily grind turn, disengaged from the linear track of progress. In the socialist and Marxist tradition, domestic life (and the unproductive labour associated with it) was a slough of irrationality, recalcitrance and potentially even of counterrevolution: a millstone around the neck of progress.6 As the locus of everyday life and a site of individual consumption, home tests the jurisdiction of specialists, such as architects, acting on the state's behalf, and the effectiveness of central state planning, a defining principle of state socialism. The contradiction between centralized, planned production and decentralized, often spontaneous consumption for and in the home has been discussed by Karin Zachmann with regard to the German Democratic Republic in the 1950s.7 These tensions, also present in the Soviet Union — between planners/producers and users, between professional designers and amateur homemakers - came to a head in the production of the domestic interior. And as we shall see below, the issue of communication between consumers and planners began to receive attention in the Soviet Union, too, during the Khrushchev era.

In this article I seek to open up some questions of authority in and authorship of the new domesticinterior. Theagences involved in producing, furishing and equipig it, and in maintaining its day-to-day functioning were manifold and often in tension or contradiction; it was a node where numerous state bodies and infrastructures intersected — and sometimes clashed — in their struggle for authority.8 These bodies and their personnel had their own departmental priorities, professional agendas and battles to fight, which were not necessarily consonant either with each other, or with those of the occupant. Home was a space of negotiation between multiple agencies: architects and urban planners; factory managers, trade bureaucrats, party activists and house committees; shop personnel, builders, carpenters, painters, electricians and plumbers; . . and finally, the humble householder.

I cannot attend here to all the parties involved in making the home, nor do justice to all aspects of the complex negotiations and struggles over the interior. I shall focus primarily on the agency, on one hand, of a range of aesthetic experts or taste professionals, who, acting in the name of the party-state and its project of building a modern, communist society, set general norms of modern living and "contemporary" aesthetic regimes; and, on the other, of individual, amateur homemakers taking up occupancy in their flats. Neither "the state" nor the "homemaker-consumer" is a unified category, it must be emphasized; expert groups that represented the state were divided among themselves, while residents of new flats were very far from a homogeneous "public" or an organized lobby with a coordinated set of priorities. But first we need to look briefly at the primary factors that made housewarming and homemaking a mass practice and aspect of popular culture as well as of official mythology in the Soviet 1960s.9
