> 来源：Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Recalcitrant bureaucrats and the battle for the interior

As the Constructivists had already discovered in the 1920s, the path of the artist into production — and thence into people's homes — was not an easy one, however.52 So, too, during the Thaw, the inertia or snobbish attitude of some artists and their institutions towards applying their artistic expertise to ordinary everyday things were not the only obstacles to the recognition of design and the designer in the modern socialist world, in the taste reformers' analysis. The authority of artists and aesthetic experts in industry had to be fought for in the production and distribution of consumer goods.53

Between the artist and the consumer stood numerous other actors, interests, institutional instances and material obstacles. Taste professionals saw themselves as locked in battle for influence over the material environment of everyday life, pitted against industrial managers who refused to adopt innovative designs or listen to artists, and trade organizations that failed to place orders with industry for new styles or products. In spite of the best efforts of artists, they argued trade and industry still continued to present the Soviet people only with outdated styles. At the end of the 1950s furniture shops remained "museums of bad taste," as Zhukov had charged in 1954, stuffed with the ornate and heavy styles favoured by the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie, which were quite inappropriate for the homes of Soviet workers. To sell such atavistic items could only corrupt the people's taste.54 This charge was repeated again and again in the course of the Khrushchev period. Numerous articles in a range of publications complained that, far from promoting modern, socialist standards of good taste, shops continued to peddle the old, propagating bad taste and bourgeois values by inertia or default, "to the joy of their lazy and ignorant directors but to the sorrow of the consumer."55 Krokodil named and shamed furniture workshops still producing models that were "great grandmother's dream" - antiquarian styles and items of furniture such as commodes that no longer had a role in the modern Soviet home. In a tale of not-sohappy housewarming, a husband wonders why his new bride is not pleased with their new home. Then the scales fall from his eyes:

Where are we? Visiting a cattle-merchant or a retired collegiate assessor? The young husband looked around and groaned. It was not heaven. Or rather, it was heaven, but some other heaven, not ours, not contemporary but remote.56

Despite all the talk about the need for production according to the laws of beauty, the journal Smena charged, all one could find in the shops were dinner services in outmoded form, crude wallpapers, and luxurious chandeliers: all things that would satisfy only "philistine" taste and not that of a modern Soviet person.57 Even new commodities such as television and radio sets with the latest technology came encased in cabinets that masked their modernity with a style of a bygone era. Thus, "new, rational forms struggle against ordinary, banal mass consumer goods."58

The continued production of tasteless and outdated things revealed the absence of qualified artists in factories, aesthetic reformers charged. Even in industries where artists were routinely and traditionally employed, such as textile production, ceramics or glassware, they were not properly empowered to introduce new designs. "(T)he artist in the factory is at best a consultant, sometimes a welcome one, sometimes only tolerated, but in general [seen as] dispensable. It cannot go on like this. Either the artist will become a fully accredited participant in the production process or our "shirpotreb" ("mass consumer goods") will be abandoned to banality and tastelessness — there's no third way!"59

The problem, identified already in Saltykov's 1954 critique and repeated in many subsequent considerations, was that responsibility for approving designs for production and distribution was left to, or arrogated by, trade and industry administrators. Housing architect K. Blomerius, also writing in Sovetskaia torgovlia, blamed the slowness of the Moscow furniture industry to introduce new forms and styles on the fact that the body responsible for approving models, the Artistic Council of the board of the Moscow sovnarkhoz, was dominated by representatives of industry and trade without any artistic training: out of 42 members only three or four were architects or artists. Consequently,

in evaluating proposals, the council is dominated by the views of representatives of trade. Based on false ideas about the tastes and needs of the population, which are engendered by the still unresolved insufficiency of various furniture, these judgments inevitably lead the council to incorrect decisions, which thereby predetermine industry's wrong approach to questions of the future development of the furniture industry.60

Bureaucrats, having little understanding of artistic matters, interposed their philistine penchant for sham and vulgar excess between artist-designers and people. "How often the caprice of the philistine behind the directors' desk decides the fate of an artists' great and thoughtful work, reduces his lengthy labours to naught, and wilfully deprives him of his well-earned fee!"61

Thus good models languished in factory laboratories without being allowed into production, while "anti-artistic" ones were produced en masse. According to Saltykov, "deciding the fate of the assortment, the retail specialist (tovaroved) arrogates the role of representative of the taste of the broad popular masses who knows best what the customer needs and what won't sell. In fact this knowledge is very often wrong, expressing the taste not of the people but of the tovaroved himself, oriented not toward progressive consumer demands but often towards backward ones."62

From Saltykov, Zhukov and Blomerius's point of view, bureaucrats usurped a role that properly belonged to experts like themselves: to speak for, and act as guardians of the people's taste. They pitted their authority as aesthetic specialists, iskusstvovedy, against that of the tovarovedy. This competition between professional groups was coloured by a large dose of social and cultural snobbery: the cultural intelligentsia's claims to be the sole true arbiter of taste and its traditional condescension towards trade workers, industrial managers and bureaucrats, whose taste it defined as regressive and philistine.63 The bureaucrats, allegedly governed by greed and self-interest, are discursively assigned the position of the class enemy of the past, against whose ignorance and regressive values the progressive and truly cultured Soviet intelligentsia must do battle in the name of the people.

As Basile Kerblay found, Soviet discourse's ideologically determined nonadmission of the intelligentsia as a class (even as social differences in consumption patterns were acknowledged) avoided the issue of differentiated access to political power and influence in the emerging social stratification. "Power too is stratified and ramified. It is important to know whether all social groups have an equal say in political decisions."64 Differentiated access to cultural authority - or "cultural capital" in Pierre Bourdieu's terms — was also not fully acknowledged in terms of its sources and power implications. However, efforts to define normative taste in the Thaw were not innocent of struggles to gain or maintain power and social status. Not only in the capitalist West but also in Soviet type socialism, consumption practices, especially the manifestation of taste, played a role in the creation and maintenance of social relationships of domination and submission. Regimes of taste were a means of everyday social positioning and hegemony in which a certain part of the increasingly massive and diverse intelligentsia assumed the prerogative to define legitimate culture. If class-based, inherited differences in access to capital were not an issue in the nationalized economy, the possession of cultural capital and markers of distinction nevertheless was.65
