> 来源：Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid)\Repenser le Dégel Versions du socialisme, influences internationales et société soviétique Khrushchev Modern Agency and (Susan E. Reid).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## The consumer-homemaker as agent

But what if the homemaker persisted in regarding rugs or silk lampshades as the essence of uiut? Who, in the end, made the interior? And was its participation in the project of socialist modernity guaranteed? How effective was the huge campaign of advice? As Anne Gorsuch observes, with reference to Derek Sayer: "the state may talk and talk, but we cannot be sure that the intended audience is listening. Instead, 'they may be snatching their "half-hour of pleasure" in whatever form."128 Indeed, in an interview project with residents who moved into newly-built apartments in the late 1950s to mid-1960s, on whose preliminary results this final section will draw, I have found that informants have no recollection of any of the advice that was so ubiquitous in the media in this period. This lack of conscious recollection may tell us little more, however, than that advice was so ever-present as to be invisible, naturalized as ideology.129

The extent to which the nature and meaning of the home was a product of interventions by the state and by specialist agents acting in its name has to be acknowledged. This is so under capitalism too, but it is especially the case in light of the planned economy, centralized state standards and design institutes, and the scale of the state-initiated building programme and welfare measures initiated under Khrushchev. Ideological interventions operated in conjunction with the material determinants of built form: architects and planners, acting for the state, called the tune and set the limits on possibilities.

Nevertheless, the production of the domestic interior did not necessarily conform to the ideal of modernity and good taste imagined for people by designers and planners. The last word belonged to the occupant. For, if the standardization and uniformity in house form tend to homogenize domestic settings, and thereby, lifestyles, nevertheless "residents often resist such hegemonic intrusions in surprising and creative ways," adapting standard forms to their specific needs.130 Dorothee Wierling offers a balanced definition of everyday life as: "the domain in which people exercise a direct influence - via their behavior — on their immediate circumstances. To a substantial degree, that everyday world is determined by others. Everyday action takes place under a set of overall conditions that are not subject to its influence. This fact notwithstanding, what is important is not just the filling in of this framework, but also its alteration or extension."131 We have looked above at some of those "overall conditions" over which the ordinary person has little or no control and which structure, limit or predispose her/his actions. In this final section we will turn to ways in which the home was an arena for his or her agency.132

Specialists on the home acknowledged the limits of their jurisdiction. Designers did not have the last word, interior design specialist Nikolai Luppov reminded participants at a discussion of the exhibition "Art into Life!" Notwithstanding common technical devices, norms and state standards that applied to the furniture and fittings for the home, it was wrong to presuppose some "standardized unification of its appearance." The final touches that complete the interior "are almost always made by the occupants who obtain the things themselves in the shops." Therefore, constant interaction with the Soviet consumer was vital, he concluded, as was the study of their demands.133 Homemaking was not a matter of passive consumption. Rather, it was a matter of collaboration and negotiation, albeit not a partnership of equals.134

Whatever the architects' utopian aspirations, in practice the potential overdeterminism of design and built space inherent in industrial production represented a limited problem in the Soviet Union of the early 1960s. There was, for better or for worse, plenty of scope for what Scott calls mutuality.135 The production of the contemporary and rationally equipped interior required a large element of reciprocal effort from occupants. It relied on their readiness to follow the ubiquitous advice, and on their resourcefulness and skills to get hold of or produce the necessary items themselves. (Tacitly acknowledging the system's failure to provide, domestic advice was often of a directly practical nature: to help the occupant construct or adapt cabinets, and install the recommended devices.)136 It also depended, if they were fully to achieve the contemporary look advocated by taste professionals, on their ability to internalize and put into practice the often unstated nuances of modern good taste: the precise sense of colour, scale and composition that were essential to its sparse aesthetic.

With the best will in the world, it was no easy matter to furnish one's interior in the contemporary style in the early 1960s. The furniture delivery plan for the third quarter of 1959 was underfulfilled by 150,000,000 rubles. The industry was still producing small quantities of labour-intensive and expensive furniture with artisanal methods.137 Moreover, as indicated by numerous indictments of furniture workshops that "beat together new commodes and fichus stands or cactus holders," it continued to produce obsolete styles and furniture types so that shops were full of unwanted things — luxury goods in styles more suited to the prerevolutionary bourgeoisie than to modern Soviet people — while one could not get hold of anything one needed.138 It took time for the increased investment in consumer goods production in the 1950s and the restructuring of production towards simple lines, synthetic materials and mass production methods to take effect, as the repeated complaints about the recalcitrance of the industry indicated. Production, particularly of the new styles that were only just being developed, could not keep pace with the rapid rise in demand resulting from the new flats. For example, an interviewee in a study of communal apartment life conducted by sociologist Ekaterina Gerasimova in 1998, recalled searching for a standard lamp in order to make the apartment cosy," but had been unable to find the right sort.139 The timelag between the promulgation of the modern style and mass provision of new flats on one hand and adequate increases in furniture production on the other could lead to a paradoxical situation whereby the would-be consumer might take a sketch or picture of the desired item seen in a magazine or exhibition to a workshop to have it made up bespoke, by hand. The irony was that the style was one expressly intended for, and determined by, the requirements of mass industrial production.140

A further disjunction between blueprint and reality is that the apartments, explicitly designed for one-family occupancy, were not always in practice allocated to a single family. For example, if the number of square metres of living space to which it was legally entitled was less than that of the apartment allocated to it, another family might be moved in as a make-weight. The problems this caused can be illustrated in regard to the kitchen. The kitchens of the new flats were between 4.5 and 6 m2, designed as working kitchens for a single "housewife" (khoziaika). According to expert advice, this compactness was a virtue, the source of efficiency if the equipment was arranged rationally, in Taylorist fashion, following the sequence of the most common tasks: wash ingredients — prepare them — cook.141 But if three families were housed in the same small apartment, trying to use the same kitchen at the same time? An informant who moved into a newly built apartment in Leningrad in 1959 tells how her "one-family" kitchen was shared by three families. Those who moved in first took the best spaces, while the third to arrive got the most inconvenient place by the stove and sink.142

Several of my informants talked about the difficulties of positioning gas and plumbing appliances in accordance with ubiquitous "regulations." One had tried to move her stove slightly because it stood "irrationally," but she found it impossible since, at the time, there were no flexible hoses for the gas pipes — it was fixed once and for all, allowing no room for manoeuvre. The kitchen furniture had to be squeezed between the fixed items, stove and sink, regardless of rationality or convenience.143 Another had run into problems with the gas authorities, Lengaz, who pronounced her relocation of the store "against regulations." She was forced to move it back.144 Others were more successful in finding ways around the problem. One Leningrader recalled that herfather hadmoved the stove to thenterior wall adjoini the bathroom and had put the refrigerator where the stove had been, in order to use the space more "rationally." When representatives of Lengaz inspected and declared: "It is no i plardneulains!"hey rt mto things done. "We don't know anything, we just moved in," they claimed, bribing the gas man to turn a blind eye.145 There were many tactics for circumventing such situations. A bottle of vodka might suffice, or an exchange of favours. One interviewee admitted that she flirted with the workman in order to get good quality parquet laid in her apartment. Before cars and dachas displaced it, making the domestic interior was perhaps one of the key ventures that bound the informal economy of goods, services, skills and favours together, thereby cementing social networks of mutual dependency.146

The economy of gift and favour is more usually associated with premodern, preindustrial forms of society.147 In other respects, too, the production of the domestic interior contradicted or fell short of the official image of modernity. The new apartments were mass produced with industrial methods. But they were not commodities in the sense of spanking new, ready-made items to be passively consumed just as they were. The Soviet everyday was not only a culture of shortage, but as Gerasimova and Sof'ia Chuikina have proposed, it was a "repair culture."148 Even newly purchased commodities presupposed the need for work on them — mending or alteration — by the user before they could be put into service. Similarly, the condition in which new apartments were handed over to tenants often made it necessary to invest large amounts of time, energy, resourcefulness and mobilization of networks to make them fit for habitation.149 They might not yet be connected to mains plumbing, the walls needed plastering, or the doors and windows didn't fit. The wall-mounted kitchen units prescribed by eficiency experts had to be found, or more often, made and fitted.150 The tenants' reciprocal labour in adapting, decorating and putting final aesthetic touches was widely assumed.151

Necessity aside, some tenants ignored normative advice and consciously sought to make their interior different from those of their neighbours even within their standard shell. In fact, the idea that home should be expressive of the character of its occupants was a regular component of advice.152 Some indications of popular attitudes are given in a survey of the first residents of a new cooperative apartment block in Moscow's burgeoning South-West region conducted by Elena Mikhailovna Torshilova in early 1968. Her report suggests that standardization was often identified as a problem, and twenty percent of her respondents said they did not want their apartment to look like their neighbours'. "Standard, lack of uiut: if one were to judge from the contemporary home it might seem that everyone has identical characters," wrote one respondent.153 This suggests that the tenants not only wanted to customize their home to accommodate the particular needs of their household, but also to express a sense of identity and difference from others. No less than for the bourgeoisie in the nineteenth century, making the domestic interior was, for some, a work of self-fashioning and display of family status and social position.154 This assertion of individuality may be an indication of the resident's social aspirations or class — in this case that of the intelligentsia and its selfconscious distinction from the "petit-bourgeois" or bureaucrat. The block where Torshilova's interviews were conducted was a cooperative house in a "prestige" area where many research institutes were located. The residents were employees of one such institute, people with higher education like the experts who defined the norms and like the researcher who conducted and analysed the survey.

We cannot, of course, generalize from one small survey, carried out in a single Moscow apartment block. Further research is required on the correlation between socio-demographic data and homemaking practices, and on the complexities of identifying cultural markers of distinction and class in a supposedly classless society. Evidence of interviews suggests that the appropriation of the dominant definitions of good and bad taste and modernized uiut was variable. A female respondent (St Petersburg, born 1944, highest technical education) in a recent interview project led by Timo Vihavainen on "The Intelligentsia and meshchanstvo (philistinism)," recalled her parents' view that a lampshade constituted uiut. They would not exchange their discredited silk lampshade - a key symbol of meshchanstvo in the modernizing taste discourse of the Khrushchev era — for a chandelier simply because that was fashionable. For them, to do something just because others did it constituted meshchanstvo. Philistinism resided in a lack of independent taste, in fashion slavery, rather than in the material and form of the lampshade itself.155 A male informant for the same project, recalled how, as people grew better off after the war and particularly by the 1970s, rugs began to appear. "But a rug is not meshchanstvo!" he insisted. "It is byt, normal byt!"156 Meanwhile, a female St Petersburg respondent in my project "Everyday Aesthetics in the Modern Soviet Flat" took the injunction "no excess" to "irrational" extremes, throwing reason to the winds in favour of pleasure. In spite of the apartment's very minimal allocation of living space and limited built-in storage, she had only one cupboard: her priority was to keep the floor free for dancing. "Since there was no wardrobe there was a completely free room. Dance!"157

Popular responses to the exhibition "Art into Life!" in 1961, as inscribed in the visitors' comments books, indicate a range of common reactions to the modernist style of furniture and interior decoration, although they do not tell us what their authors actually did in practice in their own homes. These written responses ranged from whole-hearted embrace of the new style to rejection or apparently suicidal ambivalence: "I would happily hang myself in one of the well furnished rooms," wrote one! (Did he accidentally omit a syllable, meaning to write poveselilsia by (have fun) rather than povesilsia by (hang myself)?)158 Those who rejected the contemporary style did so on a variety of grounds, many of them familiar from criticisms of modernist design elsewhere. They declared it "primitive" and impersonal, caricaturing it as "boxes". "How I do not like one single room! How un-cosy it all is!"159 A common, not unfounded, refrain concerned the loss of national character: they had seen it all before at foreign exhibitions, it imitated the Czechs, or worse, the Americans.160

Some had practical objections, pitting their own embodied experience against the ideal user the designers envisaged. Elderly people worried that the chairs and beds were too low for them to get up from. The lightness and thinness of the new furniture made some anxious: "Will my Mum be able to sit on the exhibit shown (chair) without breaking the legs?"161 Others wanted to remind the designers that they, as users, did not necessarily conform to the norms and abstractions on which planning and design for standard production were based. Soviet society included various different constituencies: not just newly weds and young people, but the elderly; not only urban dwellers living in new flats, but peasants. "Peasants travel to this exhibition. But what can you offer them? How to furnish a peasant house. .? In our view, almost nothing."162 Moreover, far from everyone had yet been so lucky as to move into the new type of flat for which this furniture was explicitly designed. Many families were still squashed into a single high-ceilinged room of a communal apartment in pre-revolutionary housing stock, but they, too, needed furniture. "Dear comrade artists! You have created many fine interiors, but who for? For us? No. We live, and for some time will continue to live, in 18-20 m2 rooms. A family of three or four."163

Many, however, accepted or warmly welcomed the contemporary style. By far the most prevalent comment on the exhibition was a backhanded compliment to the designers. Viewers declared themselves more than willing to adopt the new style and throw off the old ... if only they could. "I would like (after viewing the [exhibition] hall) to rid myself as quickly as possible of heavy rugs and cumbersome furniture, even if it did create uiut."164 "We need — more beautiful [things]! We need — cheaper [things]! We need — more of them!"165 By Torshilova's account, the look of many of the apartments in her 1968 survey and the principles that guided the tenants in their decisions about furnishing did conform in important respects to the official aesthetic of the contemporary style, regardless of the residents' expressed concern to individualize and differentiate their interiors. Asked "How is uiut achieved?" the immediate response of 81 percent of the 85 informants rehearsed the widely promoted modernist principles: "through cleanliness" and "a small number of things," "convenience," "unity of style" and "harmony of the whole ensemble of the interior."166 Many of the households she surveyed apparently espoused the modernist wish to be rid of the past and to make a fresh start on moving into the new apartment. There appeared to be little sentimental attachment to old things. A mere eight percent of those interviewed gave "memory" (doroga kak pamiat) as the reason for not getting rid of old furniture. As Torshilova concluded:

The new forms emerged on an entirely radical rejection of the old which was labelled eclectic, non-functional. Aesthetic negativism brought with it a general negativism: along with the tasteless frame, the photograph itself was thrown out; along with granny's bed — the memory of granny.167

By late 1966, when Torshilova's informants had begun to set up home in their new apartments, it was possible for Moscow intelligentsia households to furnish their apartments in the contemporary style, if they so wished, often through acquisition of suites imported from socialist Central and Eastern Europe. But it was no easy matter in 1961 when "Art into Life!" presented the modernizers' ideal home interiors to the public. That the furniture and other consumer goods for the home were too expensive and not yet available to buy was the most common complaint at the exhibition. Viewers' written comments expressed a sense of entitlement to the new style and of its appropriateness to the present era, combined with impatience and frustration.

You could go mad! You could go mad because all these wonderful things are nowhere and never to be bought! [...] There are so many workers possessing excellent taste, yet all the same, in the shops they sell only expensive and inconvenient things that have nothing in common with our age and our contemporary materials. The important thing here is not whether one person likes one thing or another, but that in principle all the things or almost all shown here are not produced by industry. Is it possible to put that right — or not? They've been writing about it for many years already. Can it be set right or not?168

Numerous angry comments indicated that people had grown impatient with the "logic of models." "Everything here is good! And in the shops — bad."169 "The exhibition is wonderful. Things done with great taste and very good. But as a whole, strange as it may sound, the exhibition leaves a painful impression of organized mockery of people. Do we still have to live in Potemkin villages from

Catherine's time? [..] disgraceful, and again disgraceful. Simply so offensive you could weep!"170

Some comment writers had clearly listened to and appropriated the language of public discourse on the education of taste as an essential aspect of communist upbringing:

The exhibition makes a very good impression [.] but I leave saddened. We rarely find what we see here in our shops. If we want to inculcate good, contemporary taste in our Soviet people, then the time has long passed to [. ..] stop producing old styles of tableware, ancient furniture, and philistine lampshades. Yet in our shops there are no standard lamps, beautiful light fittings, or glass shades. Furniture in the contemporary style is very rare, and there is no beautiful tableware at all. I wish that "mass production," as written on the exhibits, would indeed become mass.171

Many more comments could be cited to similar effect. Viewers at "Art into Life!" wanted the new aesthetics of interior decorating to enter their lives — if only they could get hold of contemporary style furnishings!172 The exhibition was itself intended as part of the remedy. The exhibits were prototypes that were designed to go into mass production. And the positive response of many viewers to the contemporary style would be taken as ammunition by the modernizers to support their efforts to overhaul furniture production, push through the new designs, and persuade industry and trade organizations that this was the will of the people.
