> 来源：Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura)\Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Object-Oriented Ontology and Things

Drawing on a branch of philosophy called speculative realism, object-oriented ontology (OOO) conceives of a world of objects broadly defined “whether human, immaterial, durable or fleeting” including “human beings as well as dragons, stones and the Dutch East India Company.”64 According to Graham Harman, OOO is understood as a flat ontology (philosophy of being) that is concerned with the “real and sensual” qualities and aesthetics of objects.65 Ian Bogost expands on these definitions.

“OOO puts things at the center of being. We humans are elements, but not the sole elements, of philosophical interest. OOO contends that nothing has special status, but that everything exists equally—plumbers, cotton, bonobos, DVD players, and sandstone, for example. In contemporary thought, things are usually taken either as the aggregation of ever smaller bits (scientific naturalism) or as constructions of human behavior and society (social relativism). OOO steers a path between the two, drawing attention to things at all scales (from atoms to alpacas, bits to blinis) and pondering their nature and relations with one another as much with ourselves.”66

While OOO has similarities with philosophies such as the ANT and the posthuman—in that they are also concerned with the relationships between human and non-human actors at a variety of scales—Bogost argues that ANT is more focused on dynamic and changing associations and alliances between actors. Furthermore, he believes that post-humanism clings firmly to humanism and, as result, has not gone far enough in its critique of anthropocentrism. Timothy Morton, another scholar associated with this approach, has advanced the concept of hyperobjects—defined as non-local, distributed (temporally and spatially), and viscous—that display interobjectivity.67 Morton offers climate change as an example of a hyperobject, saying, “They are viscous, which means that they ‘stick’ to beings that are involved with them. They are nonlocal; in other words, any ‘local manifestation’ [citing Levi Bryant] of a hyperobject is not directly the hyperobject. They involve profoundly different temporalities than the human-scale ones we are used to.”68
