> 来源：Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura)\Posthumanism and Design (Forlano, Laura).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Conclusion

The challenges of environmental and socio-technical change are enabling new ways of thinking about the state of our species. This article reviews literature by key thinkers from philosophy, science, and technology studies, geography, and history around notions of the nonhuman, the posthuman and the more than human. In particular, the most relevant strands of this theory such as actor-network theory, feminist new materialism, object-oriented ontology, and transhumanism are covered. With new epistemologies and ontologies to help make sense of the current conditions, it is likely that design practices will also need to evolve in order to stay relevant and to cope with new problems and questions. There is already some evidence that design researchers (and, even, businesses) are taking these concepts into account. These nascent projects provide important precedents for the evolution of the design field as it moves into areas that cross traditional silos, categories, and domains, and operate in more complex systems and networks.

At the same time, while it is valuable to engage with theories of the posthuman and develop nascent design practices, these approaches are not without their critics. In particular, it is essential to acknowledge that like humanism, the posthuman—while it makes room for multiple subjectivities—may not serve those that have been traditionally been excluded, such as women, people of color, LGBTQ communities, people with disabilities, indigenous communities, migrants, and people of diverse ethnicities and nationalities in all regions of the world. As such, it is important to ask how emergent design practices, including those that might decenter the human, might simultaneously support equality and justice for humans and nonhumans alike.
