> 来源：Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy)\Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Asking What If: The Designer as Cultural Interpreter

When design thinking emerged more than a decade ago, it offered a response to the ebbs and flows of a global, mediatized economy of signs and artifacts; in this context, professional designers play increasingly important roles, less as makers of forms and more as cultural intermediaries (Julier 2008) or as the “glue” in multidisciplinary teams (Kelley and VanPatter 2005). They are interpreters of changes in culture who then create new kinds of cultural form. Some designers have always seen design as playing important roles socially and politically as well as economically – William Morris, the Arts and Crafts movement, and Italian groups such as Superstudio and Archizoom are examples (Julier 2011); what is distinctive about the development of design thinking is its adoption within managerialist discourse, in particular business schools, over the past decade.

In just the last five years, the term is more and more ubiquitous. It found its way into conversations at Davos, the annual meeting of politicians and senior executives from global firms (IDEO 2006); at TED (TED 2009), a conference series that attracts leading figures in business, technology, and entertainment; and into the pages of the Harvard Business Review, an influential (although not peerreviewed) academic journal (Brown 2008). Design thinking and the designers who say they practice it are associated with having a human-centered approach to problem solving, in contrast to being technology- or organization-centered. They are seen as using an iterative process that moves from generating insights about end users, to idea generation and testing, to implementation. Their visual artifacts and prototypes help multidisciplinary teams work together. They ask “what if?” questions to imagine future scenarios rather than accepting the way things are done now. With their creative ways of solving problems, the argument goes, designers can turn their hands to nearly anything. Design is now central to innovation and since organizations1 are under pressure to maintain or grow market share, or if in the public sector, increase user satisfaction and effectiveness, then designers and their thinking have something important to offer.2
