> 来源：Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy)\Rethinking Design Thinking Part I (Kimbell, Lucy).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Understanding Design Thinking

Even on a cursory inspection, just what design thinking is supposed to be is not well understood, either by the public or those who claim to practice it. As Rylander (2009) points out, it’s hard enough understanding design and thinking, let alone design thinking. So it is not a surprise that those who support its application to business or more broadly to public services or social problems, have trouble articulating what it is, whether all designers can do it, whether it is something new or just a different name for what good designers have always done, and why it might be a good thing that non-designers can learn it and do it too – or perhaps they do it already. Decoupled from any one field or discipline of design, design thinking is meant to encompass everything good about designerly practices. Given the reach and appeal of these claims, it is time to explore the origins of design thinking. Above all, we must examine what it is and understand how it is being mobilized within contemporary conversations about change and innovation.

In this study three things come into view. Firstly that accounts of design thinking often rest on a dualism that makes a distinction between “thinking” and “doing” and between designers and the worlds they do design in, rather than acknowledging the situated, embodied work of design thinking in practice. Secondly, attending to the diversity of designers’ practices and the institutions in which they work makes it questionable to generalize about a unified design thinking exhibited across all of them. Thirdly, descriptions of design thinking rest on sometimes contradictory views about the nature of design and, for all the claims about being “user-centered,” still emphasize the designer as the main agent within design.
