> 来源：Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Social Life of Concepts in Design Anthropology

Adam Drazin

Anthropology’s turn to the material in recent decades has problematized notions of knowledge as abstract, and engagements with design (which can imply progress) are confronting a reticence in anthropological understandings to engage with causality by adopting agendas over the material world. I elaborate on the material culture of design concepts, and rituals of creativity, in an EU-funded design program at TU/e Eindhoven, HP Labs, and Intel Digital Health Group. An exaggerated interest with artifactuality characterizes the treatment of ethnographic knowledge. Concept is here the name given to knowledge at the interface of the material and immaterial, existing as a fl ux whose social life is given momentum by an iterative oscillation between research group and fi eld site in which each alternately assumes the role of critical subject. Such processes can lead to different understandings of social practice from traditional ethnographic processes. I advocate a renewed attention to using iterative design processes for the anthropological process and, independently of research praxis, theoretical attention to critical materialist approaches (Coole and Frost 2010; Tilley 2000).

## SPACES FOR DOING DESIGN ETHNOGRAPHY

“Do you have a room?” a design anthropologist in a multinational company asked me recently. We were discussing what were the key elements in a design ethnography course. 1 I talked about our negotiations with the university for some work space where people could conduct research on design and culture. “No,” he said, “a room—with whiteboards and all that.” The kind of room meant in this simple phrase “a room” will be familiar to any reader who has worked in a corporate or public sector environment where some kind of participatory creative work is involved. From Hong Kong to New York, one can fi nd oneself entering these distinctive spaces located in the bowels of offi ce buildings. Usually the room is oblong. At the center is a table or set of tables. At the periphery are whiteboards, fl ip charts, and supplies of assorted stationary. Various colors of markers are available, as well as Post-it notes. There are ways of sticking paper to the walls—sticky pads or magnets or white-tack. There is often some way of projecting computer images on the wall, although this is less important. All of this is encompassed somehow in a separate space, so that a group can close the door behind itself. Outside are small offi ces or open-plan areas where people work individually, together; inside, groups work together away from other people.

Having a room is not just useful, but about recognition and corporate approval of both the group and of its work, which is collaborative. Professional design is constituted as a site through such signifi ers: distinctive practices, places, and material culture, which remind us how creativity can be cultural more than actual (Hallam and Ingold 2007). The idea of this fi eld as a design culture, one among many, is the conceit upon which this chapter is based. I consider that design is relevant because of its social and cultural engagements fi rst, and secondarily because of its technical achievements. So we should begin with exploring the cultures of professional collaborative design in order to think about the wider cultural fi elds of design and its paradigmatic ramifi cations in the world.

Of course, design practices vary a great deal, and these observations are based on my own limited experience from 2000 to 2011, but they represent a recognizable thread within design practice, particularly those areas that overlap with human-computer interaction (HCI) and often deploy ethnographic methods and anthropological traditions of thinking. By anthropological thinking, I mean only that an element of the work is aimed at sociocultural understanding or interpretation, and in some instances at theorizing culture, but the actual approaches can vary tremendously from, for example, the United States to Scandinavia to Japan. Importantly, this research does not just move from social research to designing a product or service, but is iterative, moving back and forth between fi eld site and design studio. As I am an anthropologist, by defi nition the projects I have been involved in have been collaborations between design and anthropological skill sets and are, in this sense of a meeting or recombination of skills, design anthropology. 2 I have written elsewhere about the emergence of this term, the way its work can be characterized, and some of its effects (Drazin 2012). This chapter, however, is not about disciplinary labels, which are of less concern in many research environments than pragmatic considerations of what pools of skills are available to address research issues as they unfold. Rather, I am focusing on concepts as a cultural phenomenon in specifi c instances of design in order to refl ect on whether professional design culture may have ramifi cations in a broader, global, everyday cultural fi eld of design.

I am not at this stage going to defi ne what a concept is in explicit terms, or what sorts of concepts exist. I am concerned with the generalizable ways concepts work, within cultures of knowledge, through exploring the particular aspects of design concepts within design culture (within which, as a rule, many people talk about concepts as shorthand for design concepts). One of the characteristics of concepts in this instance is that people frequently try to defi ne concepts and subtypes of concepts (design concepts, anthropological concepts, philosophical concepts, etc.), and deny that things that do not fi t their own defi nitions are concepts. Hence the kinds of design concepts found in a more artistic approach such as critical design (Dunne 2008) may be unrecognizable to those with a more scientifi c or engineering-based notion of design concepts (Imaz and Benyon 2006). Many different design groups have very specifi c defi nitions of what they consider design concepts—notable would be the SPIRE group, which specifi cally defi nes design concepts and anthropological concepts—but other design groups work with different, equally specifi c defi nitions. Considering the cultural construction of concepts, the debates and contestations around concepts, the unfolding and changing act of defi nition, and the qualities of recognizability or discoverability of concepts are of more interest than any individual defi nition. Concepts in effect participate in a meta-fi eld of cultures of knowledge, negotiating not only what is known, but ways of knowing, how, and by whom.

I am taking a descriptive approach here, not a prescriptive or defi nitive one, such that in effect, we can recognize design concepts and concepts in terms of how they occur as a part of what designers do, even if at times there is contradiction within design culture about concepts. The virtue of a descriptive approach is that we can treat the terms we use as emergent more than predefi ned, and avoid the very real risk of tautology. An authoritative account of concepts aspires to inquire into thought, but it is not possible to absolutely know how people think internally: and what is easier than how. As anthropology and design overlap, they change (Ingold 2011, for example, argues convincingly for anthropology becoming an experimental science). Processes of thinking and interpretation become increasingly collaborative and artifactual, such that to defi ne what concepts are in relation to predefi ned notions of thinking (design thinking or anthropological thinking) would pre-suggest a cerebral ontological model of a particular kind. A descriptive exploration into the material culture of design anthropology work is, I suggest, a useful approach given this risk of tautology.

One of the common characteristics of work around design concepts is the drive to make and deploy material objects, a process in which the object is not a representation of thought but is a manifest thought. Objects are here material artifacts—paper, Post-Its, slides, white boards. Insofar as the design concept is also a thought and has social properties, it can also be treated as a thing (Henare, Holbraad, and Wastell 2007)—a thing may also be immaterial, while an object is normally a material kind of thing. Concepts may also have some of the characteristics of design things (Binder et al. 2011), which is a more specifi c use of the term, as well as describing a design agenda. In sum, I argue that design concepts are culturally specifi c constructs that have particular material and temporal properties, and that the cultural variability of concepts merits wider exploration because concepts have a much broader potential impact in the global world than just design studios.

## DESIGN WORK AS A SITE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTION

Design has been receiving increasing attention in recent years as a cultural site. Much of this takes the form of cultural studies commentaries (see Julier 2007). Contemporary rubrics of “knowledge economies” or the need for “innovation” show how design work is often seen as emblematic of social progress. In economic and political terms, especially in recessions, design has a redeeming quality. Moles (2002) asks what this means for design and materiality: Do people working in design do design in a materially creative process, or transact abstract design concepts more? Undoubtedly, immaterial things are given a privileged value of a very real and economically transactable kind.

Because of the prevalence of discourses of the knowledge economy, and debates about what “national innovation systems” (Brøgger 2009) comprise, it is of prime importance to pay close attention to what a design concept is in cultural terms. Design is not a politically or socially neutral space. Concepts are increasingly phenomena that mediate what kinds of relationships individual people, citizens, consumers, and users have with governments, corporations, and international bodies. An interest in the production sites of concepts (such as design studios) is potentially as signifi cant now as the study of scientifi c laboratories and the production of scientifi c facts was for critical studies of modernism, and the study of art practice has been for art (Jacob and Grabner 2010). Groundbreaking laboratory studies in science and technology studies have included Latour and Woolgar (1979), Knorr Cetina (1981), and Pinch (1986) among others. Doing (2007) is critical of some of the claims made for work on laboratories, arguing that major claims were made about facts based on relatively few studies. The social study of art, meanwhile, has not looked as much at production as on artifacts and their interrelationship with thought (Gell 1998). Morphy (2010) moves away from the rootedly “material” approaches to art, arguing for seeing it as “a form of intentional human action.” Compared with labs, art studios, and craft workshops, the design studio has remained relatively obscure as a site of cultural production. Architectural studios have been studied by a range of researchers (Schaffer 2003; Yaneva 2009). Current doctoral research concerning architectural design process and practice, such as that carried out by Hagen (2011) in Oslo, is being conducted in a number of universities. Other design workplaces have been discussed by Coles (2012); Luff, Heath, and Hindmarsh (2000); Hughes and colleagues (1994); and Schön (1985).

Anthropologists in corporate design environments, meanwhile, have been writing highly self-refl exively and critically about their own practices, purposes, and vocations (Blomberg, Burrell, and Guest 2002; Cefkin 2009; Dourish and Bell 2011; Salvador, Bell, and Anderson 1999; Simonsen and Robertson 2012; Squires and Byrne 2002), and arguably more refl exively than anthropologists in academia (Blomberg 2009). Nafus and Anderson (2009) refl ect on the signifi cance of design room usage. They outline a project at Intel where a wall collage of a British street moved internationally from one Intel offi ce to another, acquiring more and more post-it notes, commentaries, and evidence of “thinking.” This reminds us of the advice from Kelley that “the space remembers” (2001: 59).

Elsewhere (Drazin and Garvey 2009), I have argued that design merits attention as a cultural fi eld in itself, not only as a kind of overlap between art and science or technology. At a popular level, the idea of design provides one way everyone may think about and negotiate subject-object relationships in everyday life, and has particular social effects in the world. Many designed objects act like invitations to belong, offering the possibility of social inclusion or exclusion.

In this chapter, I consider cultures of knowledge in design. The design concept is one of the signifi cant compass points of this type of design work, that is an iterative design process aiming toward products or services and drawing on what is called contextual work. Teams can emerge from their rooms with newly created design concepts, or, alternatively, enter rooms with concepts to demolish. Design concepts are one measure of the work, and they vary and are continually assessed and debated. I ask how and why the concept is an appropriate way of packaging knowledge within design arenas, rather than alternatives such as facts or ideas. Second, can the design concept inform our understandings of material culture? Third, can concepts be useful for anthropological work and practice?

Observations expressed here are based on my own experience of working as a design anthropologist with three major high-tech multinationals and three major European design schools. This informal, partial, and subjective experience is supplemented by ethnographic research conducted as part of the EU-funded FP6 CHIL project, 3 where I conducted participant observation in projects by industrial design students and in collaborative meetings in various departments of the Dutch government.

During iterative, user-centered design work, concepts are talked about at particular moments—by which I mean there are particular times and places when knowledge, in its various forms, is explicitly considered a concept or concepts. Very often, work begins with exploring a space where design is supposed to have an impact—this is usually linked to the context, the market, or the user for the design, and so a group outlines what I as an anthropologist would call a fi eld site to conduct social research. The fi eld site could be in one place or be distributed across interconnecting sites, according to what makes sense for the project. Information about the fi eld site, however, is not referred to as concepts. For example, a profi le of a person, a video clip, or a collage of photographs of a hospital ward is not a concept, it is just information. At a later stage in the design process, a prototype of a product or service may be produced—again, this is not necessarily a concept. Typically, in between these stages is a phase when people sketch out ideas, group their observations, interpretations, and thoughts thematically, and work with representations of possibility. The term concept is useful during this phase.

A concept could be a clustering of observations arising from ethnography, which seem somehow related, but for which there is no actual design. The concept is here a space of possibility, not a proposal. A concept could also be a clearly planned drawing of a device that sets out a very specifi c situation of use, but a device that has not (yet) been prototyped. As the design work continues, it moves further away from the language of the concept. For example, you might have a sketch of a mobile phone that is talked of as the concept— then a model of the phone in polystyrene that, although not a working prototype, is referred to not as the concept but as “demonstrating the concept.”

There is often a crucial preparatory phase for any design meeting, involving creating a spatial, physical, and informational void. Any evidence of previous work or activity is cleared away. This means charts, models, coffee cups, packets—traces of previous collaborative efforts. If the markers or post-its are spread across the desk, they are reordered or put back into a cup. Space should be made on the whiteboards, and decisions are made about what to erase or keep. Whiteboards are cleaned with elbow grease and effort, not just erasing writing but even the most minute traces, ticks, and ghostly shapes of prior work. Ideally, a whiteboard should appear as new, whiter than white, and fresh. This voiding is about present physical artifacts, but it is also temporal. A new group work horizon is established. The starting moment to a design meeting should be made or created, and recognizable.

What is being done in the meeting space is simultaneously being done by individuals in their own private work materials. Although no one is actively checking on colleagues, if you look around the room, clutter is gone, books are open, pages are blank, laptop screens show new documents opened. Sometimes, the caps are removed from pens and the pens placed enticingly beside a blank book. Individuals signify their expectation of the commencement of work through spaces about to be fi lled.

The axis of movement of artifacts in preparation is from inside to outside. The design space is constructed as a space of equals, with no head of the table. At times, the group members are all facing outward, directing their work toward walls; at other times, they are focused on the center, at a model or chart in the middle. There is democracy of a symbolic kind in which different people (except senior managers) play a part in taking notes. You are likely to fi nd administrative staff such as group secretaries at design brainstorms, because everyone’s ideas are equally valid; secretaries seem to make good “everybodies,” but offi ce cleaners rarely do.

Having created a space, an immense effort is then made to mess it all up as much as possible. This is the storming bit in brainstorming, which on occasion involves more storming than brain. Brainstorming alternates between calls to act from rational expertise and subconscious instinct. There is also limited time: in most projects the pressure is on to continuously produce results as soon as possible, quantity fi rst and subsequently quality. There is no perfect product or concept, there is no right answer, the group just has to do something to work to the deadline specifi ed.

Design work generally involves a celebration of a sense of freedom of personal choices over the kinds of artifacts produced, through continual declarations that there are no rules. The kinds of objects the group decides to produce are works in progress: spider diagrams, charts, categories, collages, PowerPoint presentations (see Plate 1). Lists are drawn up—variously titled “themes,” “observations,” “insights.” These sorts of artifacts occupy the middle ground in an iterative design process. On one side is research information, sometimes organized into data: fi eld notes, texts, quotes, audio clips, video clips, photographs, and so on. At the other end are fi nished products of various kinds: reports, concepts, product simulations, patent applications, and so forth. In the middle are various distinctive kinds of material objects suitable to be worked on, reshaped, categorized, defi ned, sorted, prioritized, and regrouped (see Kjærsgaard, Chapter 3, this volume). These are largely informational, involving paper, whiteboards, post-its, posters, sketches, PowerPoint slides, other presentational aids, and so forth.

The work considered most creative in large organizations happens in groups more than individually. The point of the artifactual focus of the work, continually exteriorizing and manifesting knowledge in nugget-sized forms, is that artifacts can be worked on by groups. Text, audio, and video forms of information have a fi xed temporal thread, a stream of consciousness that lends itself to individual, not group work, unless properly treated. Groups instead are making associations and divisions between particles of knowledge, and so in this instance an individual must divide up his or her video into clips suitable for group work. Photographs already exist in a particle-like form, and so are often brought en masse into the process, or sometimes selected. Quotations are pulled out in a suitable form from the longer conversations in which they were embedded.

Group work creates objects either in the center or at the periphery of a room, generally alternately. People cluster around a sheet of paper laid fl at on the table or in a circle, one or two people typing away on laptops. Then the work may shift toward the walls, drawing on whiteboards, fl ipcharts, or posters. Post-it notes may be used to record thoughts, to fl ag up the notable, the bizarre, and the banal, perhaps using different colors for different types or stages of the work. Karen Holtzblatt, for example, has advocated post-its, then blue, pink, and green labels, in that order (Holtzblatt et al. 2005).

As well as the interior-exterior dimension of the group work, which is embodied in the concept of the room, there is an articulation of horizontal and vertical ways of working that makes real the possibility of executing informational transformations. Displays and representations on the wall that appear like manifestations of thoughts (not only indices of interiorized cerebral processes but materializations of thoughts), for transmission to audiences, become artifacts that are works in progress when taken down and put on the table. While the horizontal dimension does not need to privilege any dimension over another, when on the wall there is a privileging of up and down. This micro-transformation between information that is fi t-for-working and fi t-to-beseen is on a small scale an exercise in the kind of transformations of the overall work process, which moves toward a fi nal product or service, and illustrates the mutability of information made material. The material environment enables ways to fi x and to liberate collaborative thoughts.

Information matters in this process. Working on and around concepts is a social activity. The work that happens around a concept or concepts is represented as moments of unique creativity, but is conducted by routines and ritualization. It pays particular attention to material forms—the paper, its shape and color, is at least as important as what is written on it. Methodologically, in this situation, it is almost impossible to recognize a unique moment of creativity. But this is not strange, rather it is a common methodological problem in social science: social meaning must to a certain extent be repeatable if it is to be identifi able and have meaning at all.

In general terms, the concept can be understood as a principle of classifi cation, such that behind any particular thing lies a concept of what kind of thing it is. A design concept would then generally be an idea for a sort of product or service, which could be wholly new or could be a redesign. In practice, some design teams or groups have relatively explicit ways of recognizing a concept, while most are more pragmatic. In a social and economic environment that sees its own currency as knowledge, the concept is one way knowledge is defi ned, packaged, processed, and handled. This happens in actual, material environments with contingent purposes, relationships, identities, and politics. The way concepts happen, are produced, and are transacted is quite particular. We can illustrate this more clearly by comparing concepts with facts and with ideas.

Shanks and Tilley (1992) developed a strong critique of the more scientifi c tendencies in the fi eld of archaeology through exploring facts. Seeing facts as a form of reifi cation, and also commoditization, of knowledge, they argued that the notion of archaeologists producing facts had particular social and political consequences. The act of materializing knowledge-as-objects had for them an affi nity with notions of scientifi c objectivity. The most important social implication was the assumption that the knowledge might be free from social values. Facts might be circulated and passed from one archaeologist to another, independently of the originator of the fact. Many facts thus are not supposed to be made, so much as discovered. In sum, facts fi t particular cultural and social requirements. They represent themselves as knowledge without social biography, moving without footprints nor lasting associations. But in fact, Shanks and Tilley argued, they do have social lives, and to say otherwise is a pretense. Archaeological facts purport to be descriptive of society when actually being prescriptive.

In design and design anthropology work, the design concept has particular characteristics. It is for a start material, with physical form, in spite of the apparent dictionary defi nition of the term, which implies a pure thought. As a rule, thoughts in design work are referred to as ideas. If someone has something in mind, it is an idea, not a concept, until that moment when he or she begins to try to sketch it out, to do it, to make it count within the group, and at this moment the term concept may begin to be used. In this sense, design concepts are immanent concepts in philosophical terms (Price 1954; see also Deleuze 2001).

Design concepts happen at particular borderline moments in work, and may be described as processes or a fl ux. They happen at the border between the interiorized thought and the exteriorized object, a moment when, strictly speaking, neither the thought nor the eventual designed product or service actually exists in a coherent form. Design concepts are material in the sense that they consist of matter—they are PowerPoint slides, paper, diagrams—but they are often not objects.

This means that there is a sense of temporal liminality as well. A design concept can be talked about as an aim, the achievement of a possible future product or service. Concepts are soaked with anticipation. Alternatively, it is a term used retrospectively, such that a prototype or simulation on a screen is referred to as demonstrating the concept. The former use of the term implies material pertinence and existence for concepts; the latter use of the term implies that the concept is an abstract that has indications or echoes in the material world, but that is itself immaterial. Design concepts are thus, when considered as part of a design process or workfl ow, fl eeting ways in which one may talk about temporal and material thresholds. Having properties of materiality and a degree of discreteness, design concepts are things, and yet are looked back upon, or looked forward to, as much as they are considered in their own terms. Since most design work is not straightforward, but iterative and repetitive, the work moves back and forth, through preconcept and postconcept moments, as it moves forward, rarely settling on the concept horizon for long.

What design concepts do share with the classical philosophical defi nition of concepts is categorization. Concepts produce boundaries and enable the grouping of elements in different ways. Frequently, concepts are merged or are separated, but the question is always asked of individual elements: Is this the same concept, or a different one? Is the concept of a hospital service for nurses actually the same concept as a home-care service for patients? They do not have inviolable, bounded discreteness like facts. Rather, they may be molded and disputed, having just enough resistance to gain purchase on them. Concepts are questioned and pummeled continuously in an effort to fi nd out if they will simply fall apart ridiculously, or, through continuous testing, presentation, and handling around, prove to have some kind of integrity.

This means that concepts are rarely individual, but almost invariably social, manifestations of relationships as much as minds (in the Gellian sense—Gell 1998) and actions. Like facts, concepts must have a degree of transactability. Yet they must also retain a certain amount of reference. Concepts simply make no sense if they move too far away from their origination. They have contexts of use and are often connected with particular technologies, manufacturers, or service providers. The implicit purpose in a concept is not necessarily to be moved as far as possible, across the globe if necessary. Rather, in a world of design that is increasingly user centered, concepts are intended to return, not to their specifi c originators or people who helped create them, but at least to people who are like them. They are rather like domesticated facts, allowed to wander to a certain extent but always kept on a leash.

In short, the way concepts are developed, produced, and communicated always has reference to constructions of context (see Dilley 2000). Classical understandings of concepts for an anthropologist would suggest that they are like meanings, ideas, or facts in that they move somehow beyond representation to explain or interpret contextualized referents. This depends on the exact position an individual anthropologist may take on what Herzfeld calls “empirically grounded forms of knowledge” (2001: 4), in which the term grounded expresses a connection or reference, which may take a range of forms. Design concepts by contrast are explicated and given meaning by contextual data such as narratives, user studies, interviews, photographs, and so on. In practice, contexts are deployed to explain concepts rather than the other way around.

It is very diffi cult to identify the moment of development of a concept—the essential story is how knowledge moves through a series of material forms and tweaks. Often the artifactual chain from ethnography to design concept can amount to a chain of smaller steps or a social life (see Kopytoff 1986: 66–67): from encounters with people, to ethnographic data, to representations of contexts, to objects like user profi les and storyboards, to things like design spaces, opportunities, or concepts (see Plate 2). These concepts may travel back into the fi eld repeatedly, in what is called an iterative process.

The rural transport research was a piece of work conducted in 2007–2008 by Intel Health Research and Innovation in Europe (previously Intel Digital Health Group). The initial aims were multiple, combining anthropological (to understand the role of isolation and mobility in the lives of older people across rural Ireland) and design aims (turning ethnographic information into credible concepts). Hopefully in the longer-term services, products or other outputs would benefi t people like our informants. The gatekeeper was the Irish Rural Transport network, which comprises a raft of organizations across the counties of Ireland. Rural transport organizations vary, but many run minibuses once a week around particular routes. The buses go from door to door in the countryside, picking up mostly elderly passengers at home and bringing them to a central location—a local town or a community center.

In an initial stage of the project, three anthropologists (Adam Drazin, Simon Roberts, and Tina Basi) spent a week in each of fi ve different rural transport organizations, generally on the buses, in the offi ces, and with assorted passengers at home or visiting shops or at community events. We explored diversity: of size, organizational structure, and geography. We met a wide range of stakeholders: passengers, both on the bus and at home, passengers’ relatives, coordinators in the offi ce, drivers, community workers, district nurses, shopkeepers, publicans, and priests. This experience was overwhelming, a celebration of jokes and joyfulness on the buses. It could be intimidating to enter such close-knit groups, and emotional to hear how the advent of the buses had transformed lives. We looked at the rhythm of rural life, how rural inequality can result from mobility rather than wealth, and how a weekly bus ride can open up social networks, possibilities, and aspirations.

The information from the ethnography was collated together in group sessions at Intel, working with video clips, cluster diagrams on whiteboards around particular thematic issues, quotations, and still photographs. We produced a report and convened a two-day meeting with rural transport organizers for their feedback on our observations. Over subsequent months, the group began to build the themes into concepts. It was not clear whether these were products, services, or policies at fi rst, nor did we use abstract user profi les or storyboards to present. We worked with the ethnographic data within the team, the members of which were all highly familiar with the material.

A professional designer drafted product concepts as still images or representations; they were critiqued and several were scrapped. Four that remained were developed into interactive screen-based simulations using Flash software. These simulations were often called demos, meaning demonstrations, but in conversation we might refer to the four concepts as well. It seemed that these simulations had probably already passed a conceptual stage, being more demonstrations of concepts. Yet at the same time, this did not mean that we clearly had four discrete concepts, as the ideas evidently overlapped a great deal, and at times we might refer to having one concept, rather than several. At their root was the use of interfaces and new communication technologies to support the integration of social events and transport, to place mobility at the heart of the social rhythms and initiatives we had witnessed.

The three of us brought four of these demos back to the rural transport projects and, for a couple of days in each place, we showed them to the offi ce staff and the passengers to get their reactions. Through this process, we began to evaluate which concepts had more potential and also envisage specifi c elements about them—where might these interfaces be located? A home? A church? A rural transport offi ce? A village bus stop? Who uses them, and who has legitimate responsibility for transport? An individual? Their relatives? A community worker? Hospital staff? The publican? Comments were made on the specifi c forms they took—split screens, maps, or colors.

Discussion of the concepts began to illuminate and problematize particular aspects of the core theme of isolation and mobility. The moment when we presented the concepts also implicated us as anthropologists within the communities and contexts where we worked, and implicated our informants themselves in the concepts and in the particulars of the material forms they took.

The treatment of design concepts, in which ethnographers and anthropologists often participate, indicates an exaggerated concern with the artifactuality of knowledge. This means there is an elective affi nity between processes of reifi cation and shifts in the social relationships around the artifactual knowledge. The concepts in question only exist within biographies or work fl ows that articulate them with notions of context, and only make sense when seen in those terms. This situation suggests that anthropologists and ethnographers working in this area need to think through notions of material things in their own work and understanding. In a sense, every anthropologist who works in or with design has subscribed to materialism, through recognizing the material world as a force for making a difference. This does not mean historical materialism, nor that innovation, products, or technological change are necessarily progressive. Change can be retrogressive, and design anthropology should evidently argue critically against some design. What I mean is that, for better or worse, design is an important fulcrum where potential exists for anthropological engagement with sociocultural issues.

On a broader stage, the material turn in anthropology can be witnessed in sets of ideas such as objectifi cation, embodiment, and phenomenology. Knowledge is increasingly recognized as necessarily embodied or materialized, such that artifacts are not seen as indices of immaterial meanings, but manifestations. As Bourdieu (1990) writes, anthropological knowledge is itself artifactual, a form of model existing as text. Thus, metaphorical meaning exists in the interrelationships between material objects and forms, not only between material form and immaterial meaning (Tilley 1999). Ingold (2007), in a different way, points out the irony of how the notion of materiality can risk drawing attention away from actually researching material properties. One implication of contemporary materialist thinking is that meanings are much more strongly contested, contestable, and multivariate (Tilley 2000). Design anthropology here begins to explore the move from artifactual meaning to artifactual critique (Lenskjold 2011).

Henare and colleagues (2007) explicitly address the problem of how objects and concepts intersect, proposing that anthropology should focus not less but more on material things, and consider objects in many cases as themselves thoughts. Their argument recognizes an ontological turn in anthropology away from epistemology. They thus recognize that a thing itself implies categorization, or a recognition of difference, because the thing is a concept. Their notion of a thing as object-concept contrasts with Ehn’s notion of “design things” as gatherings or “socio-material assemblies” (Ehn 2011: 40; Binder et al. 2011). The idea of design things favors design engagements with social practices, and design by doing, more than design by individual thinking or things as thoughts.

There are, then, many tensions implicit within the consideration of design concepts as things. How we conceive of these things has much wider implications for how we perceive the contemporary direction of anthropological knowledge, for what practice is, and for design. For these reasons, it is important to direct attention back to the design studio and locales of group work using ethnographic material. I cannot necessarily resolve the debates outlined in this chapter, but I can assert the relevance of my observations about design concepts. Observing studio work tells us we should privilege concepts’ temporal qualities and biographies (Kopytoff 1986). As somewhat fl eeting objects, they make no sense except in considering that they are as a rule anticipated or viewed retrospectively, the object cotemporaneous with the moment of conception. Iterations of group and individual research work, of studios and fi eld sites, can also be important such that the artifactualized knowledge is cast in different perspectives, in different contexts, and through different ways of knowing. When is as important as what for design concepts.

## PROBLEMS AND POSSIBILITIES OF CONCEPTS

I argue that to talk in terms of concepts is in itself to express particular kinds of processual relationship between yourself and the material world. Concepts facilitate a step away from universals toward specifi cs and enable mechanisms of measured spatial and temporal distancing. In many ethnographically informed design projects, it is possible to witness the gradual transformation of peoples’ experiences into proposals for change, and this is not only justifi ed but demonstrated with quotations or photographs. This happens within the broader patterns and structures of design culture that help people make sense of design socially and culturally, beyond professional circles.

In design culture, concepts are characterized by a compulsion toward the material (not immaterial); are the product of groups (not individual minds);

have reference to particular places (not de-territorialized); and are the product of strongly routinized, even ritualized work. Design concepts are material forms, however transient, without necessarily being objects. Projected Power-Point slides may be ephemeral, but they are as material and physically sensed as a speech, a piece of paper, or a car. It is their material transience that characterizes them. What is important is the temporal dimension and the shifting relations that occur around the concept. In the plethora of stuff, knowledge, and information that pervades design and ethnographic processes, none of it could strictly be pointed out as self-evidently a design concept. The state of incipience means that it may be deceptive to attempt to see these entities as objects with some kind of fi xity. While they are undoubtedly the focus of fascination, of what one might call fetishism, it is essential to see change as one of their characteristics. Design concepts exist as a kind of fl ux .

This is troubling for anthropology to deal with, partly because it concerns material change. Anthropology lacks terms such as wavelength or frequency that might describe a fl ux, or in design language an iterative kind of a thing. Rather, most anthropologists’ work moves toward fi xity in texts, leading Ingold to criticize the perception of anthropological “truth” lying on “the library shelf, groaning under the weight of scholarly books” (2011: 15). Anthropological thinking frequently refl ects on the tensions, movements, and transformations between binarisms of potentially fi xed states, such as singularization and genericization in social lives (Kopytoff 1986), more than expressing rhythmic forms. This is one area where design and anthropology share a challenge.

Iterative design methodologies can here prove useful in anthropology, in spite of their disenchanting effects (Attfi eld 1999). It is not the case that concepts are necessarily prescriptive for a context, a predetermining ontology in the same way that Shanks and Tilley (1992) argued about “facts.” Concepts are in practice much more malleable, and may be useful when a piece of anthropological work is looking for a process or a way of thinking that is malleable. Concepts and iteration engage a process of knowledge building that involves not so much acts of translation, nor simple drawing of conclusions, but repetitive acts of testing of knowledge to fi nd their fi tness. As anthropologists increasingly involve themselves in design work, the question remains whether design concepts are useful for anthropologists to think with. Never mind whether anthropological work can help further design; the point is whether developing concepts can assist in the understanding of social and cultural phenomena. Because of the ways they work, concepts can be helpful in negotiating and contesting not only what we know but how we know. Their advantage in anthropology is their invitation to contextualize thought, incorporating partiality and perspectivality, but accompanying this temporal and contextual referencing comes the inevitability of contestation.

Anthropologists are increasingly carrying out research of, for, and with design and within design studios. I would suggest that this is not only about professional interests and work life but also about the growing signifi cance of the idea of design in everyday life in many parts of the world. As this anthropological work develops, I suggest there is a need to learn from social studies of science and technology, especially work on the production of facts in laboratories (Doing 2007), which has led toward considerations of the material world wholly through facticity. Latour’s (2005) assertions that matter is itself a politics of causality, and that materialism is another idealism, are both claims which cannot be disputed.

An anthropology of design should, therefore, avoid making similar grand claims: the design concept could, if we chose, be understood as one of the cornerstones of a global political order around innovation (Sunley et al. 2008). Companies pursue them. Governments legislate to support them. Ideas of property come to mean intellectual property. Companies’ and governments’ relationships with their populations come to be signifi ed more through concepts. Yet neither design, nor science, nor art, nor any specifi c way of characterizing knowledge actually rules above any other in the longer term. My proposal for the way concepts mediate relations with the material world is contingent upon the relevance of design as a cultural fi eld, and on how far we are prepared to admit to the infl uence of design in the contemporary world beyond the rooms and spaces where people work to make a material difference.

## NOTES

1. The course mentioned develops ethnographic methodologies for design engagements and is based in a computer science department, rather than in a design or anthropology department. Emphasis is placed upon applying social science research methods as opposed to design methods or anthropological modes of interpretation. This means that “design ethnography” is how it presents itself, rather than “design anthropology” (see Ingold 2008).

2. Design anthropology as a term emerges from the intersection of two disciplinary skill sets that are essentially heuristic and open-ended. Ethnographic skills are traditionally taught in anthropology by leaving the lone researcher to fi nd his or her own feet in a largely alien environment. I would not trust an ethnographer trained by being told what to do at every step. Similar heuristic principles apply in design. Designers or anthropologists are implicitly understood to be formed through experience, developing their own characteristic ways of working and fi nding the applicability of their tool set themselves. This heuristic quality of skills applies doubly when attempting to defi ne work that alternates between and interweaves design and anthropological practices. There are many ways and reasons why these two areas are combining and hybridizing productively: the use of concepts is one reason, and the one I discuss in this chapter.

3. Computers in the Human Interaction Loop (CHIL) was a project involving a range of university and commercial partners across Europe and the United States that aimed to use embedded computing systems to support work interactions (for example, in meeting rooms) while minimizing the need for physical computers, screens, and interfaces, which often obstruct direct human communication more than they assist it.

## REFERENCES

Attfi eld, J. (1999), Wild Things , Oxford: Berg.

Binder, T., De Michelis, G., Ehn, P., Jacucci, G., Linde, P., and Wagner, I. (2011), Design Things , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Blomberg, J. (2009), “Insider Trading: Engaging and Valuing Corporate Ethnography,” in M. Cefkin (ed.), Ethnography and the Corporate Encounter, London: Berghahn, 213–226.

Blomberg, J., Burrell, M., and Guest, G. (2002), “An Ethnographic Approach to Design,” in J. Jacko and A. Sears (eds.), The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook , Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 964–986.

Bourdieu, P. (1990), “Objectifi cation Objectifi ed,” in The Logic of Practice, Cambridge: Polity Press, 30–42.

Brøgger, B. (2009), “Economic Anthropology, Trade and Innovation,” Social Anthropology , 17(3): 318–333.

Cefkin, M. (ed.) (2009), Ethnography and the Corporate Encounter, London: Berghahn.

Coles, A. (2012), The Transdisciplinary Studio , Berlin: Sternberg Press.

Coole, D., and Frost, S. (2010), “Introducing the New Materialisms,” in D. Coole and S. Frost (eds.), New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1–46.

Deleuze, G. (2001), Pure Immanence: Essays on a Life, New York: Zone Books.

Dilley, R. (ed.) (2000), The Problem of Context , Oxford: Berghahn.

Doing, P. (2007), “Give Me a Laboratory and I Will Raise a Discipline,” in E. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, and J. Wajcman (eds.), The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies, 3rd edition, London: MIT Press, 279–297.

Dourish, P., and Bell, G. (2011), Divining a Digital Future: Mess and Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing , London: MIT Press.

Drazin, A. (2012), “Design Anthropology: Working on, with and for Digital Technologies,” in H. Horst and D. Miller (eds.), Digital Anthropology, Oxford: Berg, 243–265.

Drazin, A., and Garvey, P. (2009), “Design and the Having of Designs in Ireland,” Anthropology in Action , 16(1): 4–17.

Dunne, A. (2008), Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, Aesthetic Experience and Critical Design , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ehn, P. (2011), “Design Things: Drawing Things Together and Making Things Public,” Tecnoscienza , 2(1): 31–52.

Gell, A. (1998), Art and Agency , Gloucestershire: Clarendon Press.

Hagen, A. L. (2011), “Striking a Nerve that Opens the Why,” in J. Dutton and A. Carlsen (eds.), Research Alive: Exploring Generative Moments in Doing Qualitative Research, Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press, 67–70.

Hallam, E., and Ingold, T. (eds.) (2007), Creativity and Cultural Improvisation, Oxford: Berg.

Henare, A., Holbraad, M., and Wastell, S. (eds.) (2007), Thinking through Things: Theorizing Artefacts Ethnographically , London: Routledge.

Herzfeld, M. (2001), Anthropology: Theoretical Practice in Culture and Society, Oxford: Blackwell.

Holtzblatt, K., Burns Wendell, J., and Wood, S. (2005), Rapid Contextual Design, London: Elsevier.

Hughes, J., King, V., Rodden, T., and Andersen, H. (1994), “Out of the Control Room: The Use of Ethnography in Systems Design,” in Proceedings of CSCW ’94, Chapel Hill, NC: ACM Press.

Imaz, M., and Benyon, D. (2006), Designing with Blends: Conceptual Foundations of Human-Computer Interaction and Software Engineering, London: MIT Press.

Ingold, T. (2007), “Materials against Materiality,” Archaeological Dialogues, 14(1): 1–16.

Ingold, T. (2008), “Anthropology Is Not Ethnography,” Proceedings of the British Academy , 154: 69–92.

Ingold, T. (2011), Being Alive: Essays on Movement, Knowledge and Description , London: Routledge.

Jacob, M., and Grabner, M. (eds.) (2010), The Studio Reader, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Julier, G. (2007), The Culture of Design , London: Sage Publications.

Kelley, T. (2001), The Art of Innovation , London: Profi le Books.

Knorr Cetina, K. (1981), The Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the Constructivist and Contextual Nature of Science, Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Kopytoff, I. (1986), “The Cultural Biography of Things: Commoditization as Process,” in A. Appadurai (ed.), The Social Life of Things, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 64–93.

Latour, B. (2004), “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam?: From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern,” Critical Inquiry , 30(2): 225–248.

Latour, B. (2005), Reassembling the Social, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Latour, B., and Woolgar, S. (1979), Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Laboratory Facts , London: Sage Publications.

Lenskjold, T. U. (2011), “Accounts of a Critical Artefacts Approach to Design Anthropology,” paper presented at Nordic Design Research Conference: Making Design Matter, Aalto, May.

Luff, P., Heath, C., and Hindmarsh, J. (2000), Workplace Studies: Recovering Work Practice and Informing System Design, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Moles, A. (2002), “Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post-industrial Society?” in V. Margolin and R. Buchanan (eds.), The Idea of Design, London: MIT Press, 268–274.

Morphy, H. (2010), “Art as Action, Art as Evidence,” in D. Hicks and M. Beaudry (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Material Culture Studies, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 265–290.

Nafus, D., and Anderson, K. (2009), “Writing on Walls: The Materiality of Social Memory in Corporate Research,” in M. Cefkin (ed.), Ethnography and the Corporate Encounter , London: Berghahn, 137–157.

Pinch, T. (1986), Confronting Nature: The Sociology of Solar Neutrino Detection, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.

Price, H. H. (1954), Thinking and Experience, Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.

Salvador, T., Bell, G., and Anderson, K. (1999), “Design Ethnography,” Design Management Journal , 10(4): 35–41.

Schaffer, D. (2003), “Portrait of the Oxford Design Studio: An Ethnography of Design Pedagogy,” Wisconsin Center for Educational Research (WCER) Working Paper No. 2003–11, Madison.

Schön, D. (1985), The Design Studio: An Exploration of Its Traditions and Potentials , London: RIBA Publications.

Shanks, M., and Tilley, C. (1992), Re-constructing Archaeology: Theory and Practice , London: Routledge.

Simonsen, J., and Robertson, T. (eds.) (2012), Routledge Handbook of Participatory Design , Oxford: Routledge.

Squires, S., and Byrne, B. (eds.) (2002), Creating Breakthrough Ideas: The Collaboration of Anthropologists and Designers in the Product Development Industry , London: Bergin and Garvey.

Sunley, P., Pinch, S., Reimer, S., and Macmillen, J. (2008), “Innovation in a Creative Production System: The Case of Design,” Journal of Economic Geography , 8(5): 675–698.

Tilley, C. (1999), Metaphor and Material Culture , Oxford: Blackwell.

Tilley, C. (2000), “Materialism and an Archaeology of Dissonance,” in J. Thomas (ed.), Interpretive Archaeology: A Reader, Leicester: Leicester University Press, 71–80.

Yaneva, A. (2009), Made by the Offi ce for Metropolitan Architecture: An Ethnography of Design , Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
