> 来源：Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# (Trans)forming Knowledge and Design Concepts in the Design Workshop

Mette Gislev Kjærsgaard

This chapter is concerned with the transition from research to design within the Body Games project—an interdisciplinary design project focused on the development of a digital playground for children. In the chapter I describe how various forms of knowledge and fi eld material are turned into design concepts at a particular workshop through the creation, circulation, combination, and transformation of knowledge pieces. As a kind of montage this design workshop juxtaposes incoherent research material, perspectives, and knowledge traditions within a dynamic composition, where design possibilities are not disclosed through a piecemeal gathering of facts about the world, but emerge in the friction between various more or less tangible and fragmented images of it. I argue that the anthropological contribution to design (as montage) depends less on detailed accounts from the fi eld, and more on a continuous involvement with and a reframing of fi eld and design practices throughout the design process.

## THE BODY GAMES PROJECT

Between 2003 and 2005, I spent nearly a year working as a researcher for as well as a researcher of the Body Games project. As a researcher for the project, I provided data and analyses on children’s play based on fi eld studies of and design activities with children. As a researcher of the project, I studied the design process itself with a particular interest in the way knowledge of children’s play was created, exchanged, transformed, and applied within this design project. My dual role as a participant in and an observer of the project differed from that of a more traditional participant observer in terms of the extent to which I deliberately infl uenced the practices I had set out to study. This was a diffi cult role to have, but also a privileged one that allowed (as well as forced) me to experiment with methods and concepts at the intersection between design and anthropology, and which has led me to understand my position in the fi eld as that of a participant interventionist (Karasti 2001) as much as a participant observer.

## One Playground—Many Players

The Body Games project was a combined research and product development project funded by the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Development. The research context involved a playground company, a theme park, and three university-based research groups with expertise in computer science, children’s digitally mediated play, and user-centered design (at the time my affi liation was with the latter). Body Games was from the outset promoted as a kind of health care project aimed at decreasing obesity among children through the development of a digital playground that would encourage children and young people to be more physically active. As a representative from the playground company explained in an interview with a magazine: “Our goal is to outmatch computer games [and] pull the fat boys away from the PC” (Larsen 2003).

However, the design team was not simply on a joint mission to save children from obesity. In fact, everyone had his or her own agendas and reasons to participate in the project. The playground company, for instance, had been losing customers for some time, as older children had stopped playing at its playgrounds and turned to computer games and sports instead. By introducing elements from computer games and sports into its physical playgrounds, the playground company hoped to attract these older children again. The obesity issue seemed the perfect angle for such a project, as it positioned the company in opposition to the computer games industry while simultaneously using elements from it to win back its “lost” children. Project researchers also had their individual and disciplinary research agendas to promote through the project. For the computer scientists, it was ambient and three-dimensional (3D) positioning technology; for the researchers interested in digitally mediated play (from now on called the play researchers), it was a particular theoretical perspective on play (Jessen and Barslev Nielsen 2003; Mouritsen 1996); for the design researchers, it was tangible interaction; and for me, it was design anthropology. So it is fair to say that children were not the only users of the outcomes of this project.

## THE OBESITY FRAMEWORK

The obesity framework served to combine different research, funding, and business interests within a single framework, and was thus as much an instrument in the service of the Body Games project as the other way around. Questioning this framework was, therefore, not only an academic issue but also a political one with possibly fatal consequences for the delicately orchestrated project setup. The way obesity and playground design was initially linked within the Body Games project was based on a very particular understanding of play held by the play researchers (who originally initiated the project together with the playground company and the computer scientists). In the project proposal (Body Games Konsortiet 2002), they describe play as a form of cultural heritage passed from older to younger children in the form of basic rules and formulas, arguing that changes in children’s upbringing such as a more institutionalized life and fewer places for free and unsupervised play had limited the possibility for children to pass on these play formulas. According to the play researchers, this had led to a decrease in children’s know-how of play, and thus in their ability to create their own games. Children had therefore turned toward the ready-made sedentary computer games with increased obesity as a result. By transferring gaming elements from computer games to the physical playground, the Body Games project wanted to lure these children away from their inactive life in front of the screen. The intention was to make a playground with embedded formulas for play, which could make up for the loss of play mentors and restore children’s ability to play physical games. What was needed—it seemed—was to fi nd the right kind of play formula—which once embedded in the right kind of technology within a physical playground would captivate children of all ages, sizes, and capabilities in physically challenging body games, producing sweat and healthy bodies in the process.

## From Research to Design

In search of appropriate formulas, games, and technology for the Body Games playground, play researchers, designers, and I initially carried out research on children’s play through fi eld studies at playgrounds, schools, and after-school centers, while engineers and computer scientists did background research on technologies of possible interest to the project.

## KNOWLEDGE IN PIECES

In the following, I focus on a particular design workshop that took place approximately four months into the project and marked the transition from this initial research phase to the actual design phase. At this workshop the entire Body Games team gathered to share knowledge and generate design ideas. Knowledge and material resulting from the research phase was presented at this workshop. Each presentation was captured on an A4 poster with a headline, some drawings, pictures, or keywords and pinned to a moveable pin-up board as references to what the workshop facilitator called “pieces of knowledge.” In subsequent design exercises, these posters were combined to form design concepts. The idea, as presented by the workshop facilitator, seemed to be that by assembling pieces of knowledge from different disciplinary fi elds—likened to assembling pieces in a jigsaw puzzle—the intertwined contours of the current state of affairs and its latent design possibilities would emerge (as illustrated in Plate 3 ).

In the workshop, posters were treated as repositories for the collection of neutral and disembodied pieces of knowledge, even if they were perhaps better understood as tools that transformed heterogeneous inputs of very different origin, form, complexity, and content into similar and homogeneous design material (paper with images and words) that could be physically handled and manipulated in the design process. The material presented at the workshop was in fact very different in style and content as well as in theoretical and epistemological orientation, and did not come in predefi ned neutral and compatible pieces ready to be shared and combined. But through the creation of posters it was turned into these (somewhat) shareable and compatible pieces, which I shall refer to as knowledge pieces .

The workshop schedule distinguished between two types of knowledge to be presented and combined at the workshop: “knowledge about children’s play” and “knowledge about technology.” In the following, I give examples of the various forms of knowledge and material presented at the workshop, and describe how this material was appropriated, combined, and transformed through the practices and technologies of the workshop.

## KNOWLEDGE OF CHILDREN’S PLAY

The kind of research on children’s play presented at the workshop encompassed a variety of research approaches, data, and theoretical perspectives. The presentations might be divided into two types. One type was mainly concerned with play formulas and the mechanics of children’s games, aiming to inform the design practice while embracing the project’s design agenda. The other type was of a more explorative nature, attempting to reframe the design practice by challenging established perspectives on children, play, and playground design within the project (Kjærsgaard 2011; Kjærsgaard and Otto 2012). As we shall see, very different insights and perspectives on children’s play were all turned into what seemed like compatible and combinable knowledge pieces from which design concepts could be built.

## Games and Play Formulas

One example of what was presented under the headline “knowledge of children’s play” was a couple of old village games called the bull and the maze (both variations of tag). They were introduced as examples of the kind of play formulas the play researchers saw as essential for the survival of children’s play culture and for the success of our playground design. At the workshop, the project team was taught how to play the games, but the possible uses of these games and their formulas in the Body Games project was not discussed at this point. The names of the games—“The Bull” and “The Maze”— were simply printed on separate pieces of paper and pinned to our boards as two separate pieces of knowledge on children’s play.

Another example of “knowledge of children’s play” presented at the workshop consisted of videos of different games that one of the designers had encountered during fi eld studies at an after-school center. Here too the focus was on the formulas and mechanics of the games and how the design team might learn from (or copy) these. During the presentation, the designer extracted what he called design values from the videos. These design values were captured on cards in the form of sentences—such as “children are constantly measuring themselves against each other while playing,” or playground equipment should be “continuously challenging”—and the cards were fi nally pinned to a poster on a board as a piece of knowledge of children’s play.

A fi nal example was a presentation of the results of a design experiment called dogma play conducted by one of the play researchers. Here a group of children had been given very simple props such as ropes or sticks and asked to design a game. The children had a hard time inventing new games using these tools, which the play researcher interpreted as a sign of their lack of play culture. Based on the experiment, he concluded: “this shows that children need help fi guring out how to play,” and that as a consequence the design team would have to embed predesigned games or formulas within the Body Games playground. His conclusions sparked a lively discussion in the group about children’s ability to invent their own games and the implications of this for our design task. Here the presenter did not simply hand over a piece of knowledge to the group, but the team critically and actively appropriated the material and conclusions presented. Still, what ended up on the board was merely a piece of paper with the title “dogma play,” which did not in any visible or physical way capture the points made in the presentation nor the discussion it had raised.

## Alternative Perspectives

My own presentation of material from fi eld studies conducted at a summer camp is an example of a different type of material. Like the designer, I showed videos of children’s games, but as an anthropologist I was more preoccupied with the relations between activities and the context within which they took place than with the mechanics of the games themselves. With the video “girls in a tent,” for instance, I attempted to show that there was more to understanding play—and its possible implications for design—than what could be derived from looking at the mechanics of a single game. The activities portrayed in the video were not distinct and clearly identifi able games, but an incoherent mesh of activities conducted in the playful and intimate atmosphere of a tent accommodating a group of eleven-year-old girls at a summer camp. In the video we see some girls climbing and dancing around the tent pole in what they call a strip show—although they remain fully clothed—while others are laughing at a girl who pretends to vomit with a very loud and disgusting noise. This is juxtaposed with a clip where the girls talk about a story or game that they have collaboratively developed; an absurd tale set in what they call “the sympathetic veterinary hospital” where the girls play themselves reemerged from the dead in the form of fantasy creatures with animal characteristics and silly names. Although the formulas and aesthetics around which the story evolved were an important part of the fun, it was not simply the storyline that made it compelling, but also the role it played within the group. Not all the girls in the tent were included in the story, and its content was kept secret from the outsiders. The story was not simply a fun game, but also a way for some of the girls to form their own exclusive tribe within the wider group of girls. The universe and context within which these girls lived and played therefore turned out to be as relevant for understanding this particular game as the structures and the rules of the game itself. The images of these girls dancing, composing, and acting with a grotesque sense of humor while engaging in something that might or might not be called play did not fi t easily within the predominant frameworks of the Body Games project. These girls were not unable to create their own games, and the key to understanding their play did not seem to be located within the structures of a single game. Moreover, their universe far from resembled the stereotypical pink and innocent Barbie land we had often turned toward in the project when trying to design something for the girls. With the video I wanted to give the design team an impression of and a feel for children’s worlds and games and to spark discussions about our understandings and assumptions of play and its relation to playground design.

This was also the case with another of my summer camp videos showing a group of children playing tag. Here the focus was on the emergent and somehow accidental character of this particular game, and on how the landscape played an important part in eliciting and shaping the activity. By showing children as creative agents capable of constructing their own playground out of elements at hand, constantly changing the game to fi t the situation and the setting, I wanted to offer alternative perspectives on play and to initiate refl ections in the design team about the relationship between the game and the environment in which it took place, and hence about the relationship between playground designs, play activities, and the physical context. What these presentations amounted to on the pin-up board, however, was a poster with the headline “Summer Camp,” some pictures, and a short descriptive text summing up the contents of each video. As such the exploratory and somewhat elusive content of these videos was turned into solid knowledge pieces, which as a form of design material could be compared and combined with other knowledge pieces regardless of their seemingly incompatible origins.

## PIECES OF TECHNOLOGY

The computer scientists presented two different types of technologies at the workshop, which they—as the result of their background research—saw as possible ingredients in a future playground. One option was 3D positioning technology, an advanced GPS system making it possible to identify and trace the movement of children and objects in the playground, and thus to tailor the playground’s responses to the individual child. The other option was “smartits”—small computer processing units that could be built into different pieces of equipment to produce various forms of output. In the workshop, smart-its were illustrated through a physical model called the dancing pad, a rubber tile that worked somewhat like a joystick. By stepping on the tile one could make different sounds. These rather simple smart-its could be combined in various ways to form an intelligent network controlling various inputs and outputs in the playground. As one of the computer scientists explained:

[O]f course it is not just about controlling sound because you could control any kind of actuation with a system like that . . . we could imagine the surface of the playground being hundreds of these rubber things. And as the child, or the children run around we can probably create different kinds of games.

The form in which these technology options were presented carried with it particular interpretations of possible uses. These presentations resulted in two headlines for the pin-up boards, one simply referring to the technology: “3D positioning.” The other headline, “smart-its and soft rocks,” referred not just to a particular technology, but also to that technology in the particular shape of soft rocks like the dance pad. As such, an example of possible uses of this technology became synonymous with that technology. What ended up on the boards was therefore not neutral pieces on technology, but references to particular interpretations of the possible forms and uses of this technology.

## KNOWLEDGE AS DESIGN MATERIAL

In this fi rst round of presentations, knowledge was treated as if it was context-free and without knowers (Barth 2002: 2)—simply a matter of fact to be easily shared, compared, and combined. However, the examples cited earlier suggest that this was not the case. The knowledge and material presented embodied particular perspectives, interests, and agendas. It was partial, not only in the sense of being incomplete (as the puzzle-solving metaphor suggests), but also in the sense of being situated, embodied, and biased. What happened at the workshop was not a presentation and an accumulation of pieces of knowledge as much as a transformation of material in the attempt to detach knowledge from the physical, social, and academic contexts of its origin, in order to render it sharable and combinable with other forms of knowledge embedded in other traditions and contexts. Through the presentations and their representations on the pin-up boards, a complex intangible web of contextualized embodied knowledge, material, and agendas was transformed into discrete and tangible knowledge pieces that could be shared and handled in the design process, like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle at fi rst, but increasingly more like pieces in a game.

By calling them knowledge pieces, I want to emphasize the ambiguous status of these pieces, which were treated as pieces of knowledge, but were perhaps better understood as transitional objects facilitating the move from individual—and predominantly intangible—research knowledge to tangible and collective design material. Knowledge pieces were not knowledge, not yet design, and yet both. As such they were like liminal objects mediating between knowledge and design, present and future, as well as between different knowledge traditions. Like “split entities” (Latour and Woolgar 1986 [1979]: 176) representing individual knowledge and localized material, but at the same time taking on a life of their own, knowledge pieces were meant to facilitate interaction between seemingly incompatible types of material, knowledge, and perspectives. It seemed that only through their simultaneous association and disassociation with the knowledge and material they were to represent were they able to work their magic.

Through presentations and their representations on posters, heterogeneous knowledge and material of different origin, form, complexity, content, and scope had gradually been decontextualized, disembodied, and transformed into homogeneous and tangible pieces. It was these homogeneous and tangible knowledge pieces rather than the heterogeneous material originally presented that became the building blocks, or the design material, from which design concepts and strategies were constructed within the project.

## BRINGING THE BITS TOGETHER

Having presented the material and accumulated the pieces, it was time for the design work to begin. In groups the project participants were given two posters, one with “knowledge of children’s play” and another referring to “a piece of technology.” The task was then to combine these to produce a design idea that pooled elements from both. This design idea was then represented on yet another poster with a headline, a drawing, and keywords. The new poster went through a similar group work session where it was combined with other ideas resulting in other posters with more refi ned design ideas purportedly encompassing more of the insights presented in the fi rst round. In this way the workshop worked toward a design concept using previous posters as fuel for new ideas and new posters, embedding the original material in layers upon layers of interpretation and representation.

The process of combining the pieces was presented as a rather straightforward procedure, but in most cases the attempt to combine different knowledge pieces created friction and raised discussions in the groups, as different perceptions of play, children, and technology collided in our interpretations and combinations of these pieces. In the process, implicit agendas and different understandings were brought into light and challenged in our attempts to stretch our ideas of the design possibilities each piece might offer. Refl ection, creativity, and design ideas thus arose from the gaps and frictions that occurred when juxtaposing and combining these knowledge pieces, not unlike the way meaning is constructed in a montage, through the combination and juxtaposing of perspectives (Eisenstein 1949; MacDougall 1998; Marcus 1994). Knowledge pieces afforded, encouraged, restricted, infl uenced, or elicited certain interpretations and uses more than others, but did not prescribe them. The meaning and possible uses of the pieces were not embedded within them, but emanated from their situated translations, combinations, and juxtapositions. The workshop thus served as a form of interdisciplinary tinkering with skills, knowledge, material, and concepts in a tangible form of montage, where the interpretation of knowledge pieces as well as their design potentials depended not only on their form and content, but just as much on their dynamic composition and framing within the design process—how they were juxtaposed and combined with other types of material in the process and by whom.

## COMBINING PIECES—AN EXAMPLE

In the fi nal round of group work, participants were asked to choose a board with knowledge pieces and design concepts from the previous rounds to bring with them to the session. This was a way of forming an attachment to and alliance with the material, forcing us to take a stand and make some kind of commitment to our shared pool of knowledge and ideas. In groups of four, contents of the boards were combined into presumably more complete and coherent design concepts. Here the boards themselves became agentive knowledge pieces in the design process, to some extent acting on behalf of the people whose knowledge and ideas they were seen to contain. At the same time, they were appropriated by the people who chose to bring them into the group work and who may or may not have participated in creating the ideas they contained, but nevertheless felt a connection and therefore chose to serve as their advocate in the session. As such, board and advocate formed a pair and it was these pairs that were combined in the session, rather than simply the boards with detached pieces of knowledge and ideas. Thus this session was just as much about combining different people’s perspectives, agendas, and skills as it was about combining contents of the boards. The boards became vehicles for the combination of skills, agendas, perspectives, and “corpuses of knowledge” (Barth 2002).

Having chosen a board, everyone proceeded to the adjoining room for the creative work to begin. Here the boards were arranged so that they formed a wall outlining both physically and symbolically the work space of each group. In my group, we started the session by inspecting our collective catch of boards to decide whether they constituted a good match. The group consisted of a playground designer, a computer scientist, a play researcher, and me. We represented quite different agendas, perspectives, skills, and corpuses of knowledge within the project, as our choice of boards and our interpretations of their potentials indicated. The computer scientist, for instance, had chosen a board that contained ideas for a 3D computer game implemented as a virtual layer on top of the traditional playground. Using 3D positioning technology in combination with hand-held devices—like PDAs, mobile phones, or tags—the playground envisioned on this board would be able to track the movements of each player and provide a platform for various kinds of predesigned games. In his choice of board, the primary focus had been the possibilities 3D positioning technology had to offer, which was his particular agenda in the project. The play researcher had chosen a board that contained somewhat similar ideas about a playground with embedded games, but this time based on smart-its technology. His board contained ideas for playgrounds with embedded storylines or formulas that might serve as play mentors for children, which was a particular concern to him and matched his research interests. The designer’s choice of board included ideas for a particular digitalized version of tag set in a rather elaborate playground landscape. This board shared with the previous boards the idea of a predefi ned and built-in game, but was more focused on the materials and the physical environment—which happened to be this designer’s fi eld of expertise—and less specifi c about the technology behind it. My board, on the other hand, contained ideas for augmenting a traditional playground area by embedding smart-its within surfaces and equipment to elicit different responses—for example sound or light—when used or stepped upon. The children could then incorporate these responses into different kinds of games and activities as they pleased. From my perspective, the ideas on this board differed from the previous ones because they did not prescribe the games played in the playground, but offered more open-ended feedback that could support children’s own development of games, which was my particular concern at this point in the project.

The computer scientist made the fi rst move by introducing his board as well as his reasons for choosing it. This started a discussion about the possibilities of designing a three-dimensional computer game and evolved into a more general discussion about the overall design task. The disagreement revolved around the question of whether to design the playground as a game or not, and to what extent the rules of such a game should be designed in advance by us or during play by the children themselves. This discussion, which started as a discussion about 3D role play as presented on the board, eventually became a discussion about our understandings of play, playgrounds, and children, revealing differences in our interpretations of the material presented on the boards as well as in our perspectives on children, play, and design more generally, as is apparent in the following excerpt from our design dialogue:

Computer scientist: So it is really about taking the Harry Potter [universe] or another kind of role play and embedding it in a physical game with the help of technologies that may offer such possibilities.

Me: But I still think that it is important that we do not design the games, but that there are different possibilities [for use] within them . .

Play researcher: There are two options, as I see it. One is to make a platform for constructing stories, which should be fl exible enough to allow us to make many different stories. The other option is to fi nd things that may inspire them [the children] to produce their own games. The last one is not that easy, I don’t think. The fi rst one is easy, though it requires that we hire someone to create the stories . . . so the second option is the diffi cult one; to make something that inspires them [the children] to actually keep the game going [by themselves].

Me: I think it’s risky if it becomes too game-like . . . [because] if you look at the way children play, they play many different games within one place, and if it doesn’t allow for that, I don’t think it will work.

Computer scientist: I also think that it would be good if the elements—that could be the bombs here [points to a drawing] or the dots here [points to another drawing]—if they could be something that children themselves could move and reconfi gure, so that we [the design team] could make the building blocks, and they [the children] place them in the playground .

Play researcher: But . . . if we simply say, okay here you have all the bombs [elements in the game], now it is up to you to fi gure out what to do with them, then nothing would happen.

Designer: Are you inferring that the game would need to be initiated [by us]?

Play researcher: It needs to have a form, some kind of form.

Designer: That they [the children] could build on, that would be ideal, right?

Me: I guess it must have [a form] . . . but that seems to imply that there is only one game, if the game needs to be initiated.

Play researcher: But play comes with formulas; it rarely occurs as what we might call spontaneous play . . . games are usually based on formulas that the children might be more or less aware of. So when we play games like the bull we are aware of what we’re doing, but there are other games, like tag, where we are less aware of the rules and the formulas, but they are there nevertheless. They are almost indispensable.

Me: Even if you’re simply climbing the climbing frame, I mean, the more bodily games? Play researcher: No, not then . .

Me: But that is Body Games, isn’t it?

Play researcher: That’s true, if that’s all you are after, simply making them [the children] move. But if they really have to sweat .  .  . that is when a game triggers something through the way it works [the formulas] . . . it can keep them going.

Me: But then we simply have to fi nd something that may trigger these different formulas?

Play researcher: Yeah that’s it. . .

Me: But still, I guess, you cannot really decide in advance what [actions] something might trigger, that is really the diffi cult part.

At some point during the subsequent design activities, I try to change the conversation and the focus away from predefi ned storylines and games by playing my piece: the augmented playground. Turning the focus to another piece of design material set the group discussion off on another track. Now it was the drawings on my board that were looked to for inspiration. The idea of an interactive surface with built in smart-its gained momentum, as it seemed to combine various interests in the project. The designer saw it as good business for the playground company, because: “The customers complain about the playground mats being far too expensive, but if we could add some cheap technology to them, then . . . ” The computer scientist imagined a surface of soft-rock-like tiles with embedded smart-its working as a gaming console and a horizontal computer screen on which children could be their own avatars in a physical computer game. As he put it:

Then it would simply be a horizontal computer screen, and this [the tiles] would be the pixels, and then you have the x and the y coordinates on this guy here, so you know where he is, and then instead of computer avatars, it’s the children moving about [in the game].

Combined with 3D positioning technology, this could be developed into something resembling the 3D computer game on the computer scientist’s board. To him it was an expansion of the design concept on my board, because the technology and the physical design remained the same. To me it was a completely different concept that afforded different kinds of activities in the playground and embodied a different view on children and play. This developed into a discussion about whether to understand the children as game consumers or game designers.

Searching for a solution that each member of the project team could be happy with led us to explore design ideas, which allowed for some degree of electronic control of the game as in computer games, but also some degree of freedom for the children to construct and reconfi gure their own games. We wrote this down as a shared design principle, “Partly electronically controlled computer games & partly construction of own universes/worlds,” and posted it on our board as a new and shared piece in this design game. Based on this principle we developed ideas that allowed the children to reconfi gure, program, or shape the playground by, for instance, moving in particular patterns (codes). This opened up the possibility of a playground in which children themselves could create zones and design responses, simple games, and universes, but which might also have elaborate and predefi ned games as an option. It was not simply a games console, but a platform for the performance and development of different kinds of games and activities.

In the clashes occurring when juxtaposing and combining the material on the boards, implicit assumptions and dormant differences were elicited and negotiated both explicitly and implicitly through our design moves. The friction between perspectives embedded in the ideas and material posted on the boards as well as in our interpretations of them forced us to keep stretching and transforming this design material—and to some extent our own perspectives on it—in the attempt to create design concepts that made some kind of sense to everyone if for different reasons. With the design principle, we had established some degree of temporary common ground, even if the discrepancies in our understandings of children, play, and design were not dissolved.

At the very end of the design workshop we were left with a single design vision or strategy, fi xed in a single drawing (see Plate 4 ). With this fi nal piece, it seemed we had successfully managed to transform the heterogeneous material we started out with into a coherent design strategy, and that a new shared order had been established. Still, our differences and disagreements remained latent even within this fi nal piece, which was itself a kind of collage or hybrid of different design concepts, agendas, and viewpoints, and (as it turned out) open for reinterpretations and renegotiations at each stage of adjustment and refi nement toward becoming a real playground in the real world (Kjærsgaard 2011).

Like Latour’s circulating references (Latour 1999: 58), the material presented at the collaborative design workshop went through “a regulated series of transformations, transmutations, and translations, at each stage losing particularity, multiplicity and continuity, but gaining circulation and compatibility” (Latour 1999: 70–71) on its way from individual and situated knowledge to collective design material, and fi nally shared (interdisciplinary) design concepts. Inspired by Latour, we might depict the process as shown in Plate 5 .

As in Latour’s description (1999), this transformation happened as a trade-off between what was gained (compatibility, coherence, interdisciplinarity, collaboration) and what was lost (particularity, professional expertise, multiplicity). In retrospect, it might seem like the design process was a battle between predefi ned and fi xed positions, fought through the production and transformation of various forms of material at the workshop, but this was not how we experienced it at the time. No one joined the workshop with a clear mission, but everyone came simply with his or her different input and backgrounds. This obviously predisposed us toward some interpretations and design moves rather than others, but did not mean that our positions were settled from the outset. We were also inquisitive, susceptible to infl uence, and unsure of what to make of it all. On one hand, the design process was like a strategic game, with everyone trying to position their perspectives and ideas to maximize their infl uence on the outcome; but on the other, it was simply a struggle to understand and make use of each other’s material, knowledge, and skills when interpreting, stretching, bending, and negotiating the material at hand in the process. Although it may seem as if our positions were more or less stable, while the design material was in constant fl ux, our perspectives and interests were also stretched and bent, if sometimes only slightly and temporarily. Often we would fall back on earlier positions when confronted with new material, and the process would start all over again. New insights, perspectives, or positions had to be continuously reproduced through the transformation and negotiation of the material at hand. Neither design concepts nor our positions were settled once and for all, but only found temporary stability in between sessions in the shared pieces (of paper) pinned to the boards.

## THE WORKSHOP AS MONTAGE AND RITUAL

Like a rite of passage the design workshop facilitated the transition from research to design (Halse and Clark 2008). At the workshop, dissimilar and not necessarily coherent forms of knowledge and material of an actual present were transformed into shared visions for a potential future through a temporary suspension of ordinary life and a detachment of people, knowledge, and material from their usual surroundings.

Inspired by Kapferer (and with him Turner and Deleuze), we might think of this design workshop as a ritualized descent into the virtuality of reality (Kapferer 2004), a special kind of reality suspended between the actual and the potential. Within the virtual reality of the workshop, the usual rules, roles, and hierarchies were (temporarily) suspended, and everyone was allowed to tamper with knowledge and material outside their area of expertise while playing with boundaries between the present and the future, the social and the material, at the periphery of their knowledge traditions. At the design workshop, diverse forms of knowledge and material were gradually turned into shared design concepts, visions, and strategies via the creation, circulation, combination, and transformation of knowledge pieces. The dynamic composition of people and material at the workshop did not simply facilitate a transition of the project from one predefi ned fi xed stage to the next, but also a reorientation and a transformation of perspectives and material.

In the analysis presented here, interdisciplinary collaboration was not about assembling pieces of knowledge about a predefi ned reality out there into a complete picture of design possibilities, but rather a question of negotiating images of and interest in different realities through the construction, composition, and transformation of various kinds of knowledge pieces. Rather than regarding the process as a jigsaw puzzle, we might think of it as a form of montage that combines and juxtaposes various types of data, ideas, insights, technology, people, skills, perspectives, and knowledge traditions. In the design workshop refl ection, creativity and design arose from the dynamic composition of and the gaps and frictions (Tsing 2005) between these elements, not unlike the way meaning is constructed in a montage. Knowledge, meaning, and design implications did not reside in the material presented at the workshop as much as in the dynamic composition and transformation of it. It was less about the material itself, and more about the way it was created, transformed, appropriated, combined, and juxtaposed with other types of materials and by whom.

If design collaboration is more like a montage than a jigsaw puzzle, this has implications for our understanding of the material presented at such events as the workshop, as well as for our understanding of the role of anthropology (and other knowledge traditions) within the design process in general. Perceiving design as a form of montage also means recognizing that forming an understanding of the fi eld (of use) is a collective endeavor that happens throughout the project, not simply the work of the anthropologist prior to it. In the design montage, the anthropological contribution therefore depends less on an accurate representation of the world on the basis of research conducted prior to design and more on a continuous involvement with and reframing of practices (in the fi eld as well as in the design studio) throughout the design process in the attempt to stimulate discussions about assumptions and frameworks that were taken for granted within the design team.

## REFERENCES

Barth, F. (2002), “An Anthropology of Knowledge,” Current Anthropology, 43(1): 1–18.

Body Games Konsortiet. (2002), BodyGames—IT, leg og bevægelse: At udvikle produkter, der udnytter IT teknologi til at skabe interactive legetilbud med udfordrende fysiske lege for alle aldersgrupper, Projektansøgning til IT-Korridoren, Denmark.

Eisenstein, S. (1949), Film Form: Essays in Film Theory, New York: Harcourt Brace.

Halse, J., and Clark, B. (2008), “Design Rituals and Performative Ethnography,” in Proceedings of the 2008 Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference , EPIC 2008, Copenhagen, Denmark, 128–145.

Jessen, C., and Barslev Nielsen, C. (2003), “Børnekultur, Leg, Læring og Interactive Medier” (excerpt from “The Changing Face of Children’s Play Culture,” Lego Learning Institute). Available at: www.carsten-jessen.dk/ LegOgInteraktiveMedier.pdf. Accessed September 27, 2012.

Kapferer, B. (2004), “Ritual Dynamic and Virtual Practice: Beyond Representation and Meaning,” Social Analysis , 48(2): 35–54.

Karasti, H. (2001), “Increasing Sensitivity towards Everyday Work Practice in System Design ,” PhD dissertation, Department of Information Processing Science, Oulu, Oulu University Press.

Kjærsgaard, M. G. (2011), “Between the Actual and the Potential: The Challenges of Design Anthropology ,” PhD dissertation, Department of Culture and Society, Section for Anthropology and Anthropology, University of Aarhus.

Kjærsgaard, M. G., and Otto, T. (2012), “Anthropological Fieldwork and Designing Potentials,” in W. Gunn and J. Donovan (eds.), Design and Anthropology, Farnham: Ashgate , 177–191.

Larsen, K. H. (2003), “Fremtidens interaktive legeplads—Legeredskaber med kunstig intelligens skal give fysiske udfordringer til fremtidens børn,” Ungdom og Idræt , 29: 12–15.

Latour, B. (1999), “Circulating Reference: Sampling the Soil in the Amazon Forest,” in B. Latour and S. Woolgar (eds.), Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 24–80.

Latour, B., and Woolgar, S. (1986 [1979]), Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientifi c Facts , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

MacDougall, D. (1998), Transcultural Cinema, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Marcus, G. (1994), “The Modernist Sensibility in Recent Ethnographic Writing and the Cinematic Metaphor of Montage,” in L. Taylor (ed.), Visualizing

Theory: Selected Essays from V.A.R. 1990–1994, New York: Routledge, 37–54.

Mouritsen, F. (1996), Legekultur: Essays om børnekultur, leg og fortælling, Odense, Denmark: Syddansk Universitetsforlag.

Tsing, A. (2005), Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
