> 来源：Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Tools and Movements of Engagement: Design Anthropology’s Style of Knowing

Kyle Kilbourn

## THE AFFINITY OF TWO FIELDS

With the kickoff meeting for a health care innovation project looming, Lars glances at the board (see Plate 6 ) where I have arranged images from visits to Danish hospital sterile supply wards in an overlapping pattern.

Speaking in a tone of admiration, he says to me, “you are the only one with a sense of aesthetics around this place.” This should not be surprising because the institution where I work educates primarily engineers. Yet, Lars, an industrial designer by training, calls me the scientist when we discuss upcoming research projects and writing papers as a contribution. There are several tensions in play here: fi rst, what counts as research and, second, research’s role in generating knowledge within design and engineering processes. I can see why my practice-based teaching colleagues chose this moniker. There is a clear tension between different styles of knowing, which is itself the result of the increasing interdisciplinary collaboration taking place in the name of innovation. While Hacking (1992) details several “styles of reasoning” in an effort to debunk the idea of a singular science, my colleagues are most familiar with that of the laboratory where controlled experiments, using specifi cally built equipment, are used to observe and measure. In contrast the current exemplar of magnetic resonance imaging technology to describe which parts of the brain activate when people are shown products, as if measuring will deduce why we buy these objects, seems almost nonsensical when viewed from a perspective of social and cultural science. Holbraad explains that “fi eldwork is the exact opposite of lab work: an experiment out of control, fi eldwork is by nature orientated not towards planned eventualities but rather toward arbitrary coincidences” (2010: 82). The lab style of knowing parallels the production of knowledge in engineering where piecemeal models are constructed. The premise is that one can break down components into their smallest parts and then subsume them into a system with a particular valuable function. This is familiar to positivist natural sciences, in that the key to understanding life is to reverse engineer it into ever smaller bits and pieces, and it is a shared source of mutually defi ned objectivity for these styles.

However, this is quite different from either design or anthropology. At the core, design and anthropology embrace holism, an emergence of knowledge through the bringing together of differences in context and critique to lay a foundation for transformation (see Kolko 2011 and Otto and Bubandt 2010 for design and anthropology perspectives, respectively). In reaffi rming the bricolage of design and anthropology (Sperschneider, Kjærsgaard, and Petersen 2001), this chapter shows that design anthropology is a particular style of knowing where the tools we think with and the movements of translating knowledge across disciplines and practices is valuable to the collaborative projects where innovation and future-orientated perspectives are paramount to bridging contextual practices with societal forecasts. The affi nity of design and anthropology is more than a fl eeting infatuation and goes to the core of how we understand.

## TOWARD A PARTICULAR STYLE OF KNOWING

Sympathy for a particular style of knowing is crucial to a fi eld with both anthropology and design as part of its identity. Crombie’s (1988) six styles of scientifi c thinking through the methods they employ (simple postulating, laboratory experimenting, hypothetical modeling, taxonomical ordering, statistical analyzing, and genetic deriving) indicate that what is considered knowledge is generated within and through a particular style. Hacking postulates that “every style of reasoning introduces a great many novelties including new types of objects, evidence, sentences (new ways of being a candidate for truth or falsehood), laws (or at any rate modalities), [and] possibilities” (1992: 11; formatting modifi ed). What characterizes design anthropology as a style of knowing? What objects are introduced? What possibilities become available through this style of knowing?

The experience of doing research tends to be left out of accounts of knowledge generation in many of the styles of scientifi c thinking, especially laboratory and statistical methods. This emphasis might be conceived as a superfi cial add-on to the core of one’s work, yet the magnitude of its importance on the fi eld is worth taking into account as it suggests a deeper value for our way of generating knowledge than only the production of knowledge, namely a growth of human potential. Descola writes of anthropological process as experiential: “It should be seen, rather, as a certain style of knowledge—that is, as a pattern of discovery and a mode of systematisation that are supported by a set of skills progressively acquired through practice, both a turn of mind and a tour de main, a particular knack picked up through experience” (2005: 72).

The embeddedness of the researcher into particular practices and communities permeates the theoretical knowledge, and, rather than see this as an unwanted side effect, take a close look at the benefi ts of embracing the experiential. This kind of research practice builds a set of skills, experiences, and knowledge that is more than pure application of a technique repeated. It is generative and provocative and facilitates knowledge that reframes the social imaginary. The researcher as a kind of scientifi c tool, intertwined with the process, implies a set of perspectives and values integral to building and creating knowledge that cannot be ignored. Its impact also extends into other fi elds where defi ning human potential is essential. Within the participatory design fi eld, Ehn (1988: 30) echoes the signifi cance of style in the creation of knowledge and argues that designing computer artifacts is as much social and political as it is simply the application of scientifi c process or principles. If we are to consider design anthropology as a collaborative endeavor with others, the approach we take in the generation of knowledge, without alienating our partners, requires empathy and sensitivity to support and sustain emerging, wavering, and ephemeral values that differ from our previous experiences. The discovery process is fractal in that the particular path to knowledge scales beyond the instance to encompass larger social practices and systems. Similar to how prototyping in design is a way of trying out design moves, the experiential style of knowing in design anthropology validates particular choices contextually and collaboratively.

Within the design research community, a passionate debate about styles of knowing still dominates as the fi eld struggles to free itself from the shackles of other disciplines and strives to be taken seriously on its own merits through a research process that takes to heart the contribution of design (Koskinen et al. 2012). If, as a fi eld, design anthropology desires an impact on future practices, it also has to develop a way to nurture and support this creative and experiential approach to generating knowledge. But to grasp what this means, one must consider the medium in which we work as having both spatial and temporal properties that shape what kinds of tools and methods we choose when engaging in practices.

## DIRECTIONALITY REQUIRES EMBRACING INTERVENTION

To consider design anthropology as collaboration, a study with rather than of, is to resituate the work undertaken from a neatly demarcated space and place in time to a critical stance with directionality toward future practices and relations. Shifting from a fi xed frame to an emerging assembly is to frame a study “as practices of construction through (preplanned or opportunistic) movement” (Marcus 1995: 106). While anthropology traditionally draws upon the fi eld as the site of research, Sperschnieder, Kjærsgaard, and Petersen (2001) have pushed the discipline to discard terms like fi eldwork and ethnography to pursue phenomena in a contemporary positioning rather than studying people as if they were abstract from time. Marcus conceives of this as the milieu in which the anthropologist works: “The course or map of fi eldwork has to be found within its confi nes. Such a found imaginary is not the end of research or its descriptive-analytic object, but its medium” (Rabinow et al. 2008: 66). Bridging the vernacular of fi eld with the imaginary, the authors extend the territory to also include an event. Through this conceptual arc they have explicitly incorporated the realm of design as an environment in which to work. The medium of design anthropology extends from the spatially oriented fi eld to the performance-oriented event (Brandt 2001) and becomes a hybrid place or third space (Muller 2008). As we consider the fundamental properties of our medium, we will fi nd that it simply “affords movement and perception” (Ingold 2007: S25), crucial to what characterizes a style of knowledge.

Expansion of the territory of work suggests that the role of the researcher will not only include seeing (observation) as a form of engagement, but also making (design). This redefi nes the participant-observer role to a facilitatingprovoker or an active and refl exive reengagement with the context of analysis. The role of perception has been central to both design research and anthropology. In anthropology, Grasseni’s (2006) edited volume on skilled perception showcases various practices in which kinds of seeing play a critical social role. Schön explored the notion of seeing-as from a range of disciplines, which has heavily infl uenced design research through refl ection-in-action:

[T]he inquirer arrives at a new description of the phenomena before him by refl ecting-in-action on an earlier perception of similarity . . . But the idea of refl ection on seeing-as suggests a direction of inquiry into processes which tend otherwise to be mystifi ed and dismissed with the terms “intuition” or “creativity,” and it suggests how these processes might be placed within the framework of refl ective conversation with the situation. (1983: 186)

Fulton Suri highlights several cases in which designers turn their detailed observations of the world into design opportunities: “rather than observing it to describe what they see (which would involve seeing literally and objectively), their purpose is a generative and strategic one” (Fulton Suri 2011: 31). This then questions the role of anthropologists if designers learn to appreciate the world through observation. What is left for them? While there may be a role to play, Hunt (2011) emphasizes the tepidness of engagement on the part of anthropologists, especially given the discipline’s history. To value movement as well as perception requires that design anthropologists address detachment in the fundamental approaches to working. Through these events of intervention, the tools of inquiry become crucial to producing knowledge. Drawing upon design tools as “things-to-think-with” (Gunn 2008) provides a refl ective aspect of possibilities, creating the materials necessary to conduct design experiments for future practices. Design experiments help concretize the possibilities of human ways of working by producing concepts, which help to trigger associations between theoretical insights and the empirical material. But this has an effect on the researcher in that being in the world shapes our perception and how we come to know, as Ingold points out:

It rather educates our perception of the world, and opens our eyes and minds to other possibilities of being. The questions we address are philosophical ones . . . But it is the fact that we address these questions in the world, and not from the armchair—that this world is not just what we think about but what we think with, and that in its thinking the mind wanders along pathways extending far beyond the envelope of the skin—that makes the enterprise anthropological, and by the same token, radically different from positivist science. (2008: 82–83; original emphasis)

It is here the opening for a kind of design anthropology appears. What we think with is the crucial element that distinguishes it from the larger discipline of (take your pick) design or anthropology. I argue that it is the tools we as design anthropologists bring to the situations we engage that differentiate us from other fi elds. It is our style of knowledge, the environments of thinking, and ways of working, weaving observation, interpretation, and inspiration that distinguish the fi eld of design anthropology.

## EXPLORING METHODS OF INQUIRY IN DESIGN ANTHROPOLOGY

Fetishizing methods and their appropriate use can occur in any discipline, yet methods remain one of the main ways a practice meets the world outside of scholarly literature. This packaging of research into bundles of tools often focuses on the terminology and, therefore, places emphasis on written communication and what to name things and phenomena. While documentation and reportage play roles in the spread of knowledge, in some ways it is an end point where method becomes immutable in form and approach, ultimately becoming the standard process rather than a tool kit of options. Design anthropology tends toward the emergent. Important to note is a shift away from purely analyzing and preserving practices toward facilitating and crafting nascent human potentials. Clark (2007), as an example, creates the tangible analysis kit as a way to ensure social interaction becomes a resource as part of the design process when straddling ethnography and design. The tool kit for crafting potentials will build upon conversation and observation to include the staging of collaborative workshops that span knowledge traditions in the spirit of generating instances of multi-sited fi eldwork. Written documentation will merge and be enhanced with video annotation in a synthesis of meaning through design moves.

The spillover, crossover, or gray zones between anthropology (focusing on ethnography) and design has been described as a bow tie (Wasson 2002) that quickly morphs into a matrix stringing together designers and researchers. It also has been envisioned as a horseshoe (Jones 2006), which pushes research toward design concepts. However appropriate (and useful) these metaphors are, more intriguing is the tension created in approaches that embody the desire to understand the present while simultaneously intervening in the future; being both critical yet generative as seen in Plate 7 .

Halse “explores the possible in the existing” and proposes “understanding and intervening can be done in one movement” (2008: 32). So while acknowledging the limitations of espousing yet more methods, there is great value in looking at the tools we use as a way of crafting potentials to scaffold the creation of meaningful human experiences. Tools in design anthropology must have several qualities in common. They guide a process in eliciting possibilities and potentials. Effectively, there is a directionality and future orientation. Often they are embodied in a tangible way, reminiscent of practices rather than staying wrapped up textually. Perhaps most important, they maintain a kind of duality or hybridity among a set of elements. Tools allow for an unfolding relation to grow, whether that means between a current and future practice, stickiness around observation and provocation, or even bridging participation with control. The following tools show how the values of a practice are embedded within a seemingly benign tool.

## ROBOTS TAKE OVER? TOOLS FOR QUESTIONING FUTURES

On a Danish island, perhaps most famous as the birthplace of Hans Christian Andersen, a new generation of tales is being told. Situated between mainland Europe and the Danish capital of Copenhagen, Funen (Fyn in Danish) is the epicenter for a confl uence of thinking to implement automation technology into the health care and social sectors. While administratively it is known as the region of southern Denmark, the Welfare Tech Region has the goal to acquire resources, skills, and infl uence to become a generator of jobs, infrastructure, and knowledge. One of several projects initiated through regional development funding, The Sterilcentral Project brings together local hospital sterile supply departments, technology providers (robotics and information technology), and other knowledge partners (network clusters and university departments) to negotiate a future that includes multiple kinds of automation technology to help complete the work of resterilization of medical devices for operations. But what if we begin to unravel this ideal future narrative? Will robots take over the sterilization ward to fully automate the process? What kinds of tools allow for an unpacking of assumptions yet also orientate toward a reweaving of the tale through more collaborative efforts? Through sketching this project, I will introduce three tools to get a sense of how design anthropology might undertake such an endeavor.

While the process of synthesizing and creating meaning from our experiences is present in both anthropology and design, it is the latter that draws more often upon other approaches than textual ones to communicate the resulting synthesis. It is odd that we experience the world with a range of perceptual systems and then, when trying to make sense of it, we resort to squeezing it into words. Designers have used mood boards, targeted collections of imagery, as a way of absorbing the material and visual surroundings at a particular moment and as a way of pointing toward a possible trajectory; a way of making sense of the present while also carving out a space for exploring the future. The fi rst design anthropological tool I call perceptual synthesis as it explores ways of understanding based upon visual, embodied, and nontextual frameworks rather than starting with linguistic encoding.

In preparing for the Sterilcentral Project kickoff workshop, where all of the partners met for the fi rst time as part of the three-year journey of working together, an immersion toolkit was created to help everyone fi nd a way to experience a part of the hospital workplace and, through negotiation and discussion, to frame an issue to explore through designing. The components included a foam fl oor plan of a hospital sterile supply ward, which had photographs we had taken from observations pinned to different areas. These photographs were indexed to short video clips that showed a particular action or conversation in preliminary fi eldwork (inspired by the video card game in Buur and Soendergaard 2000). Each group chose several clips to watch and annotated its own observations. Relying on the photo representation and the video content, each group brought together clips (represented by the paper cards) that could share common characteristics. This transforming of concrete instances by simultaneously stringing together and pulling into a higher level of abstraction gives this perceptual synthesis a hybridity of form and content. The way of working is both very tangible (the cards are physically manipulated) and ephemeral (the actions recorded quickly fade unless annotated and described). It is also an individual and collaborative effort at the same time in that the insights come from each actor’s perceptual observations while themes are generated in the group. The approach begins from visual roots and only the fi nal step enters into written language. This hesitancy or slowing down of the fi nal outcome allows others to join the process. What would happen if as a discipline we started to incorporate and embody nontextual synthesis as a part of our repertoire? One hopes that a practice that embraced and collaborated with more knowledge traditions would be the result.

The second category of tool for design anthropology that I suggest is experience juxtaposing. The purpose of such a tool is to explore potential experiences while fi rmly present in the here and now. Imagining such a possibility is, of course, not the same as having the experience, but the strength comes from comparison. As part of the preliminary engagement with the hospitals in the Sterilcentral Project, we created a series of cards depicting superpowers that our participants could select such as super strength, shape shifting, and microscopic vision. While it might seem silly or childish with cards and illustrations that looked as if they came from a comic book, the participants took them quite seriously when asked which three they would choose and why. We took this approach to understand what the role of robot technology would be in the worker’s practice. While visions of technology often turn out much more mundane than anticipated, by pushing the hospital worker into the central role with the choice to wield technology as a power we could get closer to what it would feel like if technological solutions were implemented. Through the conversations mediated by the superpower cards, several themes emerged, including that of distinguishing details. The sterilization technician explains, “a robot cannot see if there is dirt or which instrument needs to be greased. So you are not quite unemployed, anyways.” While we had introduced our purpose as an initial exploration of robotic technology in the hospital, workers had already carved out a niche that would preserve a specifi c role for people in the fully automatic sterilization ward. The “microscopic vision” superpower card served both as the prompt and as support for articulating this position. The tool helped turn a forecast of robotic technology into a collaborative foretelling of what value technicians bring to their work. The juxtaposition of the immediate workplace with the future gave a creative space to envision the appropriateness of potential technology.

The third kind of design anthropological tool, potential relationing, is concerned with ways to experience the embeddedness of future practices. Often, concepts are great for addressing one particular aspect of a problem, but they tend to leave behind the interconnected nature of social life. Drama and acting can be used to great effect in exposing the seams of practices. These performances are rich with explicit understandings of our current relationships and how we wish them to change. In another workshop for the Sterilcentral Project, four groups of participants generated scenarios of completed solutions as a way of understanding confl icting visions for the project and how workers would relate to the likely new robotic coworkers. Through the performances, we hoped confl icting visions of technology would emerge. To ensure robotics were part of the solution space, we advised the teams that at least one person in every group should play the role of the robot. However, everyone volunteered! The technological vision of the fully automated ward came to life through the play. The scenario most sympathetic to a human role in the work had robots sorting simple instruments from complex ones, with the latter worked on by people.

These embodied performances, while effective at seeing a system in use, struggled to illustrate the tensions in introducing new technology. As a result of its performative aspects, potential relationing highlights the socialness of the event, meaning that in collaborating the performers run the risk of playing to the audience to weave a cohesive narrative. The strength of working with a tool such as this is that the social web (including people and their environment) quickly gets laid out to allow for a space to critique, question, and refl ect before full-scale implementation and its inherent danger of failure (Kilbourn and Bay 2011). Inconsistencies and confl icts push to the surface much more quickly than in the usual process of building the technology fi rst and asking questions of appropriateness and social integration later. One anthropological contribution was in the questioning of assumptions and establishing meaningful frameworks beforehand, rather than post-project.

How do these kinds of tools relate to building a research practice in design anthropology? How do researchers engage with theory? If design anthropology is a collaborative rather than a solitary process, how do we reposition our own research practices in a similar manner? One running approach I have trialed with other researchers involves making theory tangible as part of an embodied practice. Drawing upon design processes, I sought to make a more direct relationship between theory and empirical data. Often the hidden aspect of the research craft is how experiences, theory, and empirical material collaborate. Through this design process, I wished to expose how theoretical perspectives change ways of working with the empirical material. As part of an inquiry into theory and practice, I created a workshop format called the Research Game in which condensed theoretical perspectives (in the form of key quotes on cards) were used as a starting point for developing research questions and subsequently used as a way to analyze a set of video clips. There have been three variations of the game, the fi rst in the context of a PhD seminar to delve into one specifi c fi eld site from multiple perspectives, the second was a workshop at an international design conference using many different fi eld contexts (Sitorus and Kilbourn 2007), and the third was part of a strategic department planning session to envision types of research and how they relate to the educational profi le. Each variation pushed the boundary of collaborative research practice in that theory became more than literature because it was embodied throughout the process, from framing to refl ecting. In the conference workshop it was interesting to see how theory guided the design process. There were diffi culties in transitioning from large theoretical concepts to specifi c empirical materials, and some participants suggested it would be more fruitful to end with theoretical concepts rather than begin with them, which makes sense for design anthropology rather than anthropological design.

The game provided a slightly more transparent and tangible approach to incorporating theoretical concepts in design research. The workshops were a microcosm of representations that fi nd their way in design practice. The ethics of rearranging people’s skills explores the role of empirical material in framing the dialogue. Should we preserve or enhance a particular practice? What role should theory play? Will a certain kind of theory overpower practice? As the fi eld of design anthropology straddles a strong practice-based tradition with a rich theory-generating fi eld, comparative tools for collaboration should be a key component of such a discipline, forming one of several modes of engagement of this research practice.

## SKETCHING DIFFERING TRAJECTORIES OF ENGAGEMENT

In preparing the ground for new kinds of research in design anthropology, its scholars will have to grapple with the traditional practices of ethnography such as observation, description, and interpretation in a way that acknowledges local knowledge practices but also introduces artifacts to facilitate learning as part of an innovative research fi eld. Through my work, I distinguish three overlapping modes with a particular style, medium, and tools, which underlies the shift at the core of a design anthropology discipline: moving in, moving along, and moving out. These modes are not separate components that can be delineated and parceled out to experts, but integral to the researcher to engage in all three iteratively.

Moving in is concerned with the collaborative approach of understanding with other people as part of our research. In many ways it is not enough to document and archive: it is critical to refl ect with and through practice to introduce change. To do this requires helping to articulate embodied practices while also bringing together design and use practice. Mogensen (1992) investigated how “provotyping” could critique everyday practice in systems development as way of rising above the dilemma between tradition and transcendence in participatory design. Rather than having to choose either to support the current practice or to ignore skills and knowledge and push for a future-orientated agenda, provotyping suggests a dialectical tension that manages to relate the familiar and the new through refl ection-in-practice. In educational action research, McNiff describes the fundamental tenet of the approach as “research WITH rather than research ON” (1988: 4; original emphasis). For a successful moving in, research tools are developed for collaborations among knowledge practitioners. In the Sterilcentral Project, an immersion tool kit of photos, fl oor plans, and video worked to tie together separate knowledge traditions toward a common purpose. To characterize this mode of movement as intimate points to the level of engagement familiar to anthropological fi eldwork, yet also different in the deliberate dialogue generated through an intermediary artifact. While these types of movements are essential for any anthropological pursuit, design anthropology should aim to go beyond an ethnographic encounter within a fi eld site.

Moving along frames the research beyond the specifi c contexts we fi nd ourselves in and approaches the project as one with larger boundaries than anticipated. As Hines says, “moving around gives us ways to suspend judgment about the appropriate places to study experience and make interventions and the appropriate ways to reproduce methodologies” (2007: 669). One way of smoothing and shading the complexity is to explore how the research might temporarily span contexts. The Sterilcentral Project cast my role as the expert in understanding work practices for design. I chose to embrace the role before the project kickoff meeting and then hand off aspects of expertise to others as appropriate to fl exibly situate myself in reframing the relevant issues. While within the project boundaries, other participants were invited to share the expert role of engaging in fi eldwork at the hospital sites through a fi eld guide that served as a team-building exercise as more people collaborated in fi eldwork. The unbundling of the anthropologist as the observer expert helped balance competing interests while building empathy among all participants. This movement relates the project site with the fi eld site, but I also wished to bring student learning to the forefront of the Sterilcentral Project. Many of the workshops were an active collaboration with students as agendas, goals, and methods were developed as part of learning the research craft of design anthropology. The seepage along multiple contexts helps not only to scaffold knowledge building but makes the research dynamic and, in a sense, action orientated.

Movements between research projects show not only an understanding within one particular place or confi guration, but also an interrelationship in how materials and knowledge are mediated through various actions in multiple contexts. This allows for an emergent dimension to the research. The boundaries between the projects are not fi xed, but instead are threaded by the research. The comparison needs to extend along projects to avoid the closure that Bezaitis and Robinson point out results from a focus on outcomes: “the arcs of research came to tiny ends with each project fi nish rather than building and accumulating across instances, clients, and careers” (2011: 191). Finally, I propose moving out as the more experimental movement that leaves a zone of mutual understanding. Rather than close down lines of inquiry in fi ne-grained analysis, it is about bringing forth intriguing ways of being. It is about the “what ifs” and inspired by probing the edges of the known. Mc-Niff points to the trajectories created by such an approach:

[t]he need for a theory of generative capacity, that is, that could communicate the potential of one theory to create new theories. Rather than stopping at the traditional notion of a theory arising out of a specifi c set of circumstances and having relevance only to that setting, a generative approach views a theory as an organic device to create other theories that may be applied in other settings. (1988: 43)

Moving out from a particular practice toward opportunity sounds risky, even a loss of entanglement that is sought for in generating contextual knowledge. But Anderson sees this as exposing the frame of rationality at work in a context to bring “deep design possibilities to light” (1994: 179). These might seem to be speculative potentials, but Fulton Suri underscores the relationship between empathy and imagination: “By defi nition, as soon as we start to think ahead to future experiences and how people might respond, we begin to draw upon our intuitive and interpretive abilities. We begin to imagine and empathize” (2008: 54). The alternative is to leave it to the engineers and technologists to fi gure out the future so we can get on with producing descriptions informants can agree upon as accurate. But if we opt for this exploring of potential practices, it allows us to make explicit inherent, yet unnoticed infl uences as a form of critique. Another name for these potential practices could be theory as Bagnara and Crampton Smith conceptualize discourse: “But ‘theory’ is also commonly used to mean the constantly evolving confi guration of epistemological assumptions, conceptual constructs, methodologies, and critical values that fl ow around and through individual practices and fi elds of study, contributing to their wisdom and power” (2006: xxi).

To recognize the styles of knowledge within practices, even research practices, is to come to terms with their trajectories. Design and anthropology, like many fi elds, has problematized the relation between theory and practice as one between practitioners in the fi eld and those building conceptual walls, as it fi ghts for a place and funding in a crowded university. The question is how can a fi eld like design anthropology move beyond this characterization and consider theory a form of practice? For design, Erickson (2006) proposes the need to draw upon theories in multiple fi elds, but being free to partake in conceptual pruning when required, leaving behind disciplinary arguments and baggage while retaining a certain amount of complexity to be helpful. For design anthropology to be a merger of equals rather than a takeover by design or anthropology requires forward-leaning practices to become recognized as a particular style of knowledge of embodied theory. Or more simply, design anthropologists need to engage in designing! The tool kit of the anthropologist magnifi es as it takes on new roles of imagining news ways of being, rather than describing the previous ways. The distance between design and anthropology collapses as the style of knowledge generates its own collaborative notion of accountability in its modes of (dis)engagement.

## CRAFTING POTENTIALS TOGETHER

Proposing a move toward a crafting of potentials, as I suggest here, means that our theoretical processes and products take a generative turn and shift directionally toward future ways of being. This is not the same as fi nding design opportunities or creating design concepts. Crafting potentials is not about presenting tactical options to a particular client. The focus is of much larger import to the realm of humanity; it concerns how to frame future ways of experiencing while challenging the current infrastructure of thought. To appreciate the value of the design anthropological style of knowledge, we need to consider the medium through which we work as not only being about seeing but also making. Staying critical yet also experimental in creating the tools for emerging events will shift trajectories toward multiple modes of engagement with the world. Through this design with anthropology (Gunn 2008; Ingold 2008), researchers aim to achieve a more intimate understanding through the movement of knowledge among differing practices by engaging and collaborating. Rather than breaking human experiences down into factors and components for analysis, design anthropology scaffolds knowledge that allows for emergent relations, interconnections, and associations—theories generated through practice with potential for change. Tackling the diffi cult and value-laden domain of change and intervention is a worthy cause for design anthropology to move knowledge beyond its own discipline. In the beginning, this new fi eld will contribute and support design’s own blossoming critical positioning of its endless production mode. In the case of the Sterilcentral Project, robots may not be taking over but they surely are fi nding a place in the ecosystem of welfare and health care work. For anthropology, it suggests and envisions a reengagement through new movements and tools as a way of embracing a collaborative theoretical undertaking that breathes new life with each material reworking of previous concepts. Objects introduced in this style of knowing will be framed around facilitating and provoking rather than participant observing. Teasing together, instead of apart, is the movement of knowledge that characterizes design anthropology in contrast with an ethnography of design.

## REFERENCES

Anderson, R. J. (1994), “Representations and Requirements: The Value of Ethnography in System Design,” Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 9(3): 151–182.

Bagnara, S., and Crampton Smith, G. (2006), Theories and Practice in Interaction Design , Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bezaitis, M., and Robinson, R. E. (2011), “Valuable to Values: How ‘User Research’ Ought to Change,” in A. J. Clarke (ed.), Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century , Vienna and New York: Springer, 184–201.

Brandt, E. (2001), “Event-driven Product Development: Collaboration and Learning,” PhD dissertation, Department of Manufacturing Engineering and Management, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.

Buur, J., and Soendergaard, A. (2000), “Video Card Game: An Augmented Environment for User Centred Design Discussions,” in Proceedings of DARE 2000 on Designing Augmented Reality Environments, Elsinore, Denmark: ACM, 63–69.

Clark, B. (2007), “Design as Sociopolitical Navigation: A Performative Framework for Action-oriented Design,” PhD dissertation, Mads Clausen Institute, University of Southern Denmark.

Crombie, A. (1988), “Designed in the Mind: Western Visions of Science, Nature and Humankind,” History of Science , 24(1): 1–12.

Descola, P. (2005), “On Anthropological Knowledge,” Social Anthropology, 13(1): 65–73.

Ehn, P. (1988), Work-oriented Design of Computer Artifacts, Stockholm Arbetslivscentrum.

Erickson, T. (2006), “Five Lenses: Towards a Toolkit for Interaction Design,” in S. Bagnara, G. Crampton Smith, and G. Salvendy (eds.), Theories and Practice in Interaction Design, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 301–310.

Fulton Suri, J. (2008), “Informing Our Intuition: Design Research for Radical Innovation,” Rotman Magazine , Winter 2008: 53–57.

Fulton Suri, J. (2011), “Poetic Observation: What Designers Make of What They See,” in A. J. Clarke (ed.), Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century , Vienna and New York: Springer, 16–32.

Grasseni, C. (2006), Skilled Visions: Between Apprenticeship and Standards, New York: Berghahn Books.

Gunn, W. (2008), “Learning to Ask Naive Questions with IT Product Design Students,” Arts and Humanities in Higher Education , 7(3): 323–336.

Hacking, I. (1992), “ ‘Style’ for Historians and Philosophers,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science , 23(1): 1–20.

Halse, J. (2008), “Design Anthropology: Borderland Experiments with Participation, Performance and Situated Intervention,” PhD dissertation, IT University of Copenhagen.

Hines, C. (2007), “Multi-sited Ethnography as a Middle Range Methodology for Contemporary STS,” Science, Technology & Human Values, 32(6): 652–671.

Holbraad, M. (2010), “The Whole beyond Holism: Gambling, Divination, and Ethnography in Cuba,” in T. Otto and N. Bubandt (eds.), Experiments in Holism: Theory and Practice in Contemporary Anthropology, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 67–85.

Hunt, J. (2011), “Prototyping the Social: Temporality and Speculative Futures at the Intersection of Design and Culture,” in A. J. Clarke (ed.), Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century, Vienna and New York: Springer, 33–44.

Ingold, T. (2007), “Earth, Sky, Wind, and Weather,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute (NS) , 13: S19–S38.

Ingold, T. (2008), “Anthropology Is Not Ethnography,” in Proceedings of the British Academy , 154, Radcliffe-Brown Lecture in Social Anthropology, 69–92.

Jones, R. (2006), “Experience Models: Where Ethnography and Design Meet,” in Proceedings of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference, Portland, Oregon, 82–93.

Kilbourn, K., and Bay, M. (2011), “Exploring the Role of Robots: Participatory Performances to Ground and Inspire Innovation,” in Proceedings of the Participatory Innovation Conference , Sønderborg, Denmark, 168–172.

Kolko, J. (2011), Exposing the Magic of Design: A Practitioner’s Guide to the Methods and Theory of Synthesis , New York: Oxford University Press.

Koskinen, I., Zimmerman, J., Binder, T., Redström, J., and Wensveen, S. (2012), Design Research through Practice: From the Lab, Field, and Showroom , Boston, MA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Marcus, G. E. (1995), “Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-sited Ethnography,” Annual Review of Anthropology , 24: 95–117.

McNiff, J. (1988), Action Research: Principles and Practice, Houndsmills and London: Macmillan.

Mogensen, P. (1992), “Towards a Provotyping Approach in Systems Development,” Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 4(1): 31–53.

Muller, M. J. (2008), “Participatory Design: The Third Space in HCI,” in A. Sears and J. A. Jacko (eds.), The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Applications, 2nd edition, New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1061–1081.

Otto, T. and Bubandt, N. (2010), Experiments in Holism: Theory and Practice in Contemporary Anthropology , Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Rabinow, P., and Marcus, G. E., with Faubion, J. D., and Rees, T. (2008), Designs for an Anthropology of the Contemporary, Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.

Schön, D. A. (1983), The Refl ective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action , New York: Basic Books.

Sitorus, L., and Kilbourn, K. (2007), Talking and Thinking about Skilled Interaction in Design, Workshop Proposal at Designing Products and Pleasurable Interfaces Conference, Helsinki, Finland.

Sperschnieder, W., Kjærsgaard, M., and Petersen, G. (2001), “Design Anthropology—When Opposites Attract,” First Danish HCI Research Symposium, PB-555, University of Aarhus: SIGCHI Denmark and Human Machine Interaction. Available at: www.daimi.au.dk/PB/555/PB-555.pdf. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Wasson, C. (2002), “Collaborative Work: Integrating the Roles of Ethnographers and Designers,” in S. Squires and B. Byrne (eds.), Creating Breakthrough Ideas: The Collaboration of Anthropologists and Designers in the Product Development Industry , Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 71–90.

SECTION II

THE MATERIALITY OF DESIGN
