> 来源：Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Designing by Doing: Building Bridges in the Highlands of Borneo

Ian J. Ewart

## SITUATING PRODUCTION

My intention in this chapter is to champion the role of the producer as designer. As an engineer turned anthropologist, it seems to me to be something of a folly to attempt to isolate the process of design from that of production, as much as it is to separate out and valorize consumption (Miller 1995) over the creative activity that necessarily precedes it. An ongoing fascination in anthropology with design and consumption makes it diffi cult to position production, especially of the sort in focus here, namely what we might call an anthropology of engineering. Engineering is a specifi c form of activity, which I suggest can be defi ned as the communal production of large-scale or complex objects. This generic defi nition removes engineering from its popular perception as somehow uniquely Western and industrialized, and, as I show in this chapter, allows us to reconsider what constitutes production, and what, by unhelpful contrast, often separately constitutes design or consumption. My broader aim is to envisage engineering (communal, technical production) as a mainstream activity neither dependent on nor excluding some of those contexts of the West, industrialization, science, modernity, and progress, to thus become more common in anthropology generally.

Different approaches to production avoid or confront the separation of designing from making and consuming, of which a few deserve mention here. 1 Engineering sociology takes the view that groups of engineers negotiate a settlement in a rather businesslike way (Bucciarelli 1994, 2002), resulting in an adequate compromise instead of an ideal solution. Engineering design is commonly described as part of a complex sociotechnical system, involving, for example, the need to comply with a wider scheme (Petroski 1996), or the economic realities of a large project and its inherent potentials for misunderstanding and abuse (Petroski 2012). Engineering comes across as a practice of subverting an ideal design into a practical reality through a production process that is slowed by specifi cations and compromises and dragged along by deadlines and economics. A second approach, promoted by scholars of industrial design, assumes a close reading of the needs of the consumer and consequently ignores production as a delay between conception and use. A successful design, they argue, can predict and preempt the use of this type of object (Cross 2011; Norman 2004), usually what we would call a commodity. These same objects form the foundation of consumption anthropology, whose students reject such determinism and contend that creative use is a valid extension of design activity (e.g., Hebdige 1988; Miller 1991, 2009). Whereas for sociologists of engineering the relationship between design and production is one of friction and compromise, for scholars of design it is largely irrelevant since there is an overt emphasis (in common with consumption anthropology) on the use of objects and not on their production.

If these fi rst two approaches start from the assumption that production is a hapless consequence of design, or subservient to use, then what of the practice of actually making something? Certain strands of anthropology have over the years made efforts to think about production, especially a French tradition of the anthropology of technology (see Lemonnier 1992), but a more explicit consideration of the relationship between conception and production has come from Tim Ingold. As a prominent advocate of skilled production, Ingold has emphasized the continual formation of relations between maker and materials, questioning the infl uence of a preconceived plan and the implicit reduction of the environment to a mere backdrop for action (2000). In contrast to Cross and Norman, Ingold argues that to separate out the act of designing from life generally is reductionist and unrealistic, and specifi c to the culture of Western industrialism. To illustrate these themes, he draws on examples of craftsmanship and skill, emphasizing the importance of the relationships between people and their continually developing environment.

Setting aside criticisms of nostalgia and overemphasis on traditional materials and skills (see Ingold 2007a,b; Miller 2007), Ingold demonstrates the signifi cance of production in a way largely ignored in many other accounts. For the engineering sociologists and the various students of commodities, the physical act of production is given no more than a secondary role in the creation of an object. It is true to say that an object is created socially as well as physically, and there are interesting processes at play that deserve our attention. For anthropologists of design, of course these are essential, but in examining those processes it is important not to lose sight of the fact that somewhere along the line, people are actually making things.

To demonstrate the potential for an engineering approach, I present a brief ethnography of the design and construction of two bridges. The fi rst is traditional in the sense that it remains the same as described by early visitors three or four generations ago (Harrisson 1959), while the second was built to a more formal design using recently introduced materials, and was essentially innovative and unfamiliar. This allows us to consider whether a design, as a preconceived and formally inscribed concept, is able to dominate and direct the production process, in contrast to an intuitive or informal idea that suggests weaker mechanisms of control, which might lead to greater variety. The traditional and familiar bridge was produced with very little discussion or trouble, while the new and unfamiliar design required a more detailed plan that remained incomplete. This lack of familiarity provoked substantial uncertainty in production, requiring a series of improvised solutions to complete the project. As well as relative familiarity, a further axis of comparison comes from the fact that one of these bridges is made from traditional local materials, whereas the other is built with modern materials including wire rope and concrete. This raises questions about readily accepted concepts of industrial production and craftsmanship, and the usefulness of that distinction. Ultimately, the relationship between designing and making is a complex entanglement, and whether it is useful or even possible to separate them is at the heart of this chapter.

The ethnographic data presented here come from fi eldwork with the Kelabit people in the mountainous north of Malaysian Borneo (see Janowski 2003 for greater detail). 2 The Kelabit are a small ethnic group living on a highland plateau in a rural territory that has historically straddled the international border between Malaysia and Indonesia. Surrounded by the Tama Abu mountain range to the west and north, and the Apad Uat range to the east, access is diffi cult. A small airstrip serves the largest town, Bario, and in the last fi ve years or so commercial logging has reached the brink of the area, pushing a system of rough roads through the forest so that the highlands are now directly connected to the rest of Borneo. Most important, this includes the coastal town of Miri, a jarring ten-hour drive away, which has attracted many rural Kelabits into paid employment and a place to load up a Toyota 4WD with half a ton of whatever the world has to offer. Access to industrial resources is now possible, but still severely limited by the terrain, the weather, and the cost of transport. Access to ideas is more straightforward, as television and Internet connections are spreading to even the most remote villages. One such place is the village of Pa’ Dalih—home to around 150 people, many of whom live an agricultural life, growing rice in irrigated padi fi elds and hunting for meat in the surrounding forest. This relative remoteness means the villagers remain proudly self-reliant, resourceful, and practical, always willing to try their hand at something new. It was in and around Pa’ Dalih that I watched construction of the two bridges between 2008 and 2010.

## A QUESTION OF DESIGN

Ganang cocked his head to one side, his good eye peering intently at the piece of paper he had pushed in front of me. It was a piece of A5 from my notebook, now covered with a rough scribble in black biro ( Plate 8 ). This was August

2008, and the villagers of Pa’ Dalih had for some time been planning to build a new bridge over the river Kelapang to replace the traditional bamboo bridge washed away several years before. On the other side of the Kelapang, some of the villagers had fruit trees, padi fi elds, forest farms, and, most important, relatives. Without the bridge, getting to the village meant a long detour and wading across the river: not diffi cult when shallow, but in the rainy season the river became angry and unpredictable, and access grew much more hazardous. So plans had been hatched to build a new bridge, but not the traditional bamboo variety, something much more substantial and permanent—the Apir Long Da’an (bridge by the junction of the Da’an river), as it was named.

Ganang had been involved with many of the larger projects in the village and was nominally the village engineer, responsible for drawing up plans. He had, for example, shown me a rather professional-looking plan of a proposed new house for the pastor, which he kept pinned to his wall in a clear plastic envelope. What he had pushed in front of me was his idea for the new bridge; it was no more than a sketch, but became the basis of the formal design. Subsequently he drew something more detailed, which was the plan ultimately used on site during construction (see Plate 9 ). The four main components are the tall support towers, large concrete anchor blocks with anchor posts, wire ropes, and wooden walkway. Ganang’s drawing bore a remarkable resemblance to a suspension bridge, something the Kelabit had never built themselves, although a similar bridge had been built in 2002 in nearby Remudu by a British charity, bringing in materials and volunteer labor.

The novelty of this design lies in its differences to a typical hanging bridge. Introduced in the 1960s by British troops stationed in the area, a hanging bridge is the standard design for a more or less permanent bridge. These are usually made of a pair of wire ropes strung between trees or posts on each bank, onto which planks are fi xed to form a walkway. More wire rope is strung across as a handrail, and the whole thing is supported by tying it to overhanging trees with rattan or electrical wire. Fixed at one side and pulled tight, this type of bridge requires progressively more tension to pull the base cables level, to the extent that it is theoretically impossible to make its base fl at. In practice, the best you can achieve is a characteristic droop, which increases over time as the various components stretch and loosen.

A suspension bridge is based on a different concept, which is to support (or suspend) the weight of the base on overhead cables anchored at each end and raised on towers. The base is connected to these overhead cables with suspending wires every meter or so, whose lengths can be altered to make the base level, avoiding the steep entry and exit slopes of a hanging bridge. For Ganang and the other Kelabit, the principles of a suspension bridge were at best fuzzily understood, gleaned from their observations of the Remudu bridge and colored by their knowledge of hanging bridges. This lack of detail in the plan meant that decisions, mistakes, and new discoveries were made during construction.

I knew from early descriptions (Harrisson 1949, 1959) and my travels to various villages that the form and construction of the traditional bamboo bridge remained remarkably consistent. My host, Anderias (the Headman of Pa’ Dalih), is, like most Kelabit, a very practical man and proudly able to turn his hand to any task. I saw him fi x his car’s suspension with a belt, repair an electrical grinder, and make all kinds of things from bamboo—cups, containers, shelters, spatulas, and so on—as well as build his house. When I asked him to draw a bamboo bridge, he replied derisively, “Why should I draw one when we can just make one?” Then he put both elbows on the table and interlocked his fi ngers: “There, like that!” He was mimicking the principle of interlocking bamboo poles stretching from each side of the river and meeting in the middle (see Plate 10 ).

The Kelabit bamboo bridge is essentially a series of poles anchored on each bank and raised slightly to meet over the center of the river, where they are bound with rattan to form a shallow arch. The idea is that the poles fl ex and bounce as you walk on them, so that when you reach the center, the arch has fl attened out somewhat. Along the sides, more bamboo poles are fi xed as handrails and, like the hanging bridges, the whole structure is strengthened with rattan stringers tied to overhead trees. These materials are all perishable, so the whole thing needs to be rebuilt after a year or two, and often the rattan bindings will be replaced once or twice in the meantime.

So, do the two bridges have a design? The suspension bridge had never been made before, but had in some way been preconceived by the Kelabit engineers. The basic concept was committed to paper in two signifi cant forms: fi rst as a shape, an outline, a basic layout of major components; and second as a list of parts, a breakdown of the bits and pieces to be acquired and brought together into one place to form the object. If the drawing is conspicuously lacking in detail, logistical requirements and the contents of the list are evidence that this had been carefully planned: prepared belian (a type of very resistant hardwood) posts, 2.6 kg of 9-inch bolts, 5.4 kg of 6-inch bolts, sixteen 20-mm shackles, four 12-mm shackles, wire netting, and so on. Transporting all the materials to site was no easy matter, requiring truckloads from Miri, belian from a village 40 kilometers away, sand and stones from the river, boats to move things, and several strong men to drag it all up the bank. Arrangements for assembling the thinly dispersed tools and skills were equally complex: petrol for the generator, power tools, plastic tubing, canoes, tin sheets to make a shelter, experienced house builders, young men to watch and learn, and so on. Plans for the bamboo bridge, on the other hand, were far less detailed or carefully considered. In fact, there was not really much consideration at all. In the same spirit as Anderias’s reaction to my request for a drawing, a spur-of-the-moment decision prompted a group of men to set off, taking nothing more than they had on them at the time, including the concept of a bridge made of bamboo.

While the suspension bridge design depends on a drawing and a list of parts, as well as numerous discussions, the bamboo bridge depends on experience and memories of previous practice, everyday tools, and readily available materials. It may be that in the future the suspension bridge or its descendant becomes a part of Kelabit technological tradition so that the components, tools, and skills required become similarly everyday and widely accessible. But for now, if we ask whether they know exactly how to make these two bridges, for the planned object the response has to be no, or at least not exactly, whereas for the unplanned object the answer is yes. It is the validity and nature of this link between preconception and production that needs further investigation.

An engineered object does not come about purely by chance; there has to be some amount of determination in bringing together the rag-tag assemblage of ideas, tools, skills, components, and materials to become a coherent whole. Ingold has criticized the concept of design as a predetermining and fi nal plan of action by suggesting that objects come about through a more organic mechanism akin to growth. 3 He describes a “fi eld of forces” responsible for generating an artifact, including the maker as part of the environmental conditions that come together in the process. “These are truly creative engagements, in the sense that they actually give rise to the realworld artefactual and organic forms that we encounter, rather than serving— as the standard view would claim—to transcribe pre-existent form onto raw material” (2000: 345; emphasis in original). His argument is that organisms and artifacts can be seen as being created through similar processes, such that it is impossible to specify a complete design, either through the DNA of the former or blueprint of the latter. Hence, for Ingold, to consider a preconceived plan of activity as the basis for an artifactual outcome is to ignore the ecological truth of man’s existence in the world at large. Raw materials exist in a relationship with their environment, into which the maker steps and changes the potential form of some of the parts. In other words, and germane to this discussion, it is the relational environment that is responsible for the process of making, and not just the intentional person. The person and his actions are directed and formed by the materials as well as directing and forming them.

Ingold’s ecologically framed relational thinking can contribute to an anthropology of engineering in a number of ways: the notion of the mutual infl uence of materials and environment on a process of making; the understanding that the conceptual design is never going to be complete; and the point that skilled production is an active part of life that includes responding to circumstances. This needs to be tempered by accepting that groups of people who undertake such large-scale projects do set out with an objective in mind and make a conscious effort to manipulate materials into desired forms with the aim of overcoming the obstacles that hinder and divert them.

Contrary to the relational approach, with its emphasis on patterns of coordination rather than inherent properties, scholars of industrial design adopt a view that designers are able to empathize with their consumers and take into account their numerous desires and responses. Don Norman (1998, 2004) has written of the need for designers to understand not only aesthetics, materials, and production techniques but also, for example, psychology and biology. For Norman, there is very little that cannot be accounted for in designing an object. A well-designed object will allow for the users’ various proclivities and inherently guide appropriate use—the scope for subversion or inappropriate use is limited. Mass production of industrially designed objects weakens the link to the environment and thus for Norman the producer is not (as per Ingold) part of a creative engagement; in fact, the production process is in many ways completely independent of humanity and ecology. This provides the platform for a consumer uprising: reinserting the human into the material world by appropriating the object and enculturing it through personalization and redefi nition (Hebdige 1988; Miller 1991). Consumption studies have done a good job of bringing in the users’ perspective and critiquing the idea that objects are imposed onto society, but still neglect the importance of the actual production of the object before it comes into people’s hands. Both approaches, with their respective focus on commodities or craft objects, also seem unsuitable for describing an engineered object, understood as a large or complex object that is communally produced. The fi rst overemphasizes the designer, and the second, the infl uence of materials and environment. Production is more ad hoc and fl uid than the predetermined and anonymous activity Norman suggests, while engineers act in a more mechanical and forceful way than Ingold’s artisans and craftsmen.

They are nonetheless a collection of creative agents engaged with their environment, and as a group share a common goal. For a large and/or complex object, the scope for misunderstanding and mistakes is magnifi ed, and an exact plan is unlikely to be comprehensive enough to cope with the inevitable surprises of the production process. Bucciarelli is prominent in analyzing processes of engineering design, and uses the concept of object worlds to illustrate the fact that these are communal projects requiring a mix of skills, responsibilities, interests (1994), and languages (2002). His approach is based on the project being driven by corporate goals, using a business or management perspective as its starting point. The team is made up of specialized individuals who need to be brought together as a team to operate effi ciently. As Bucciarelli says, “Different participants work in different domains on different features of the system; they have different responsibilities and more often than not, the creations, fi ndings, claims and proposals of one individual will confl ict with those of another” (2002: 220). This is true of engineering in the industrialized world, but is not exactly true of Kelabit engineering. Bucciarelli’s object worlds consist of unique tools, texts, suppliers, codes, and unwritten rules. Their language is deceptive because although it is English it is still foreign and needs to be learned. However, the Kelabit object world is less problematic and more coherent because the same people who are doing the engineering are also farming, hunting, and relaxing together in a small-scale community. Still, Bucciarelli’s point is clear: the design process, even in the controlled environment of computers and industrialized production, does not always work.

It seems that an anthropology of engineering can draw on each of these approaches, but rely entirely on none. The Kelabit are certainly more akin to craftsmen than they are industrialists, but building a suspension bridge is undoubtedly an engineering project and uses industrial materials. Their relations with the environment are key to their success, but we need to acknowledge the radical changes that have expanded the scope of their environment beyond their highland plateau to other parts of Borneo, and ultimately much of the world. Dynamic and expanding environmental relations and historic social traditions provide the context for their design practices, which can now be illustrated with a description of the bridge building projects.

## A TALE OF TWO BRIDGES

Construction of the suspension bridge was done through the Kelabit system of voluntary communal labor, kerja sama, in which groups of villagers gather to help each other in labor-intensive tasks. For work on the bridge, this meant that on the appointed day, a group of about ten men would turn up, deposit their tools, and light a fi re. Most prominent of these were Ganang, the nominal designer; Robert, an experienced house builder; Anderias, the headman; and Jolly, his brother, who along with Anderias had accumulated most of the materials. All Kelabit men are likely to have some experience in building and repairing houses and, through regular trips into the forest, a practical ability to improvise with whatever materials are at hand. In the case of the new bridge, these materials consisted of coils of wire, piles of fi xings, wood, and tools put under a temporary tin roof by the construction site. Work began according to discussions based around Ganang’s drawing, with individuals largely left to do what they thought was best. Very soon, however, the drawing was left crumpled and ignored as the group began to see how components and materials could be used and what problems needed to be resolved. Referring to the four main bridge components mentioned earlier, I now briefl y describe the construction sequence.

The concrete anchor blocks were made by digging large holes and fi lling them with concrete made with imported cement from Miri, river sand, and stones from the roadside. Concrete is still a relatively new material, although rapidly becoming popular, so the mixing was left largely to Robert, who had worked in the building trade in Miri and was acknowledged as the most skilled builder. He effortlessly scooped up a shovelful of sand and cement, then with a fl ick of his wrist mixed them in a mid-air swirl. This mixture was then layered with stones to form a large solid block into which pairs of 100mm square hardwood belian anchor posts were set.

Before the main wooden towers could be raised, a datum level had to be set across the river to make sure the walkway remained fl at and to even out the strain. In house building, to set a level the trick is to use a clear pipe fi lled with water and mark the naturally equal height at each end of the pipe. As there was no pipe long enough to reach across the river, brief discussions led to a simple solution: a level was set between a tree and a stake about three meters apart on one bank, in line with the opposite bank. Two nails, one in the tree and one in the stake, were leveled with a short tube of water. Looking through one eye along the line of the two nails toward the opposite bank meant that with a bit of shouting, the same level could be marked with a cut on a tree on the other side.

The support towers were eight meters in height, made up of two four-meter lengths of belian, then set two meters into the ground. This was much higher than any other bridge, and the joint connecting the two four-meter lengths was the cause of much discussion. House supports are made with a lower portion of belian set into the ground, jointed onto a more readily available local wood with a bolted angled lap joint. The same joint was proposed here, but many felt the stresses would be far higher and ultimately too great. Ganang organized thick metal reinforcing plates, one to be bolted on each side of the joint, but it was discovered that the nine-inch bolts were too short to pass through the two metal plates and the fi ve-inch wooden posts. No longer bolts were readily available, so a compromise was reached by using extra bolts and discarding the plates.

Once the towers were raised, two pairs of thick wire ropes were strung across the river. One pair went over the top of the tower as the main support cables, and the second pair went near the base of the tower to take the wooden walkway. Then came the tricky task of connecting the lower cables to the upper pair three meters overhead with a series of wire stringers. Different people had privately suggested several ways of doing this, including using a makeshift platform on the upper rails or fi xing the stringers before the ropes were pulled taut. No one knew exactly what to do. In the end, the solution was clumsy and not particularly effective. The four main ropes were pulled taut; each connecting stringer had a loop put in one end that was thrown over the upper cable, the loose end threaded through its loop and pulled as tight as possible. Even after much effort, the wires could not be pulled tight enough to prevent them slipping, and the whole procedure became mighty precarious toward the center of the bridge where there was nothing to stand on except a few planks balanced on the lower ropes. Ultimately, many of the connecting wires slipped down and offered no tensioning support at all.

I describe some of the tribulations of construction, not to highlight them in particular or to imply that the Kelabit struggled to cope with the size or complexity of the project. On the contrary, these and a myriad of other minor hiccups were all dealt with in good humor and the usual Kelabit resourcefulness. The Apir Long Da’an was eventually completed in late 2009, after about six months of work. The villagers of Pa’ Dalih are rightly proud of their achievement, describing it as “the best Kelabit bridge ever,” and in many ways it is. It is probably the largest they had built, using the best materials available, and as several of the builders said to me, it looked at home in its forest setting (see Plate 11).

Crossing the river Kelapang via the new suspension bridge and walking along the path a few hundred meters, you come to a tributary, the Da’an River. The Da’an was crossed by scrambling over a pile of fl ood-deposited logs, and it was agreed that a new, relatively small, bamboo bridge would be built here. The span was about ten meters, nowhere near as long as the forty meters of the suspension bridge just upstream, and seen as a relatively simple task. Before the new bridge was constructed, a forty-meter bamboo bridge would have been made across the Kelapang in the same place.

A notably skilled forest man, Isi Berawan (Robert’s father), along with Robert, Ganang, and Lian, a young bull of a man, set off one morning to do the job, with me keenly tagging along. The two main materials—rattan and bamboo— were both readily available: bamboo is especially prolifi c in the area, including right next to the site of our bridge over the Da’an. Bamboo is not deliberately planted, but poles are carefully chosen so as to leave enough growth for future use, resulting in extensive stands rising up an impressive twenty or thirty meters. Having seen the size and number of poles in several bamboo bridges in the area, I expected this new bridge to be a fairly major job requiring considerable planning and coordination. And so we set off, a homemade cigarette hanging from the corner of Isi’s mouth, Robert poling his canoe upriver to meet us, Ganang loping along at his own steady pace, and Lian crashing off into the forest without a word. No sooner had we reached the site than everyone seemed to spring into action at once. Isi selected and chopped down several of the huge bamboos, pushing them into the river where Robert collected them and, along with Ganang, hauled them up onto the bank. As they did this, Isi fi xed one bamboo horizontally across two trees on the opposite bank at about the same height as the bank where I was standing (setting levels was not an issue here). They slung three poles between this one and my bank and began lashing them beautifully together with rattan to form a walkway. Meanwhile Lian reappeared noisily, carrying what looked like several enormous trees on one shoulder, trimmed the ends to stake points with his parang, and hammered them into the ground. I found out later that these were a particular species of tree, known to root enthusiastically when planted like this. Before I knew it, a handrail was fi tted, an exit ramp constructed, and Isi was clambering about high in the trees, tying up the rattan, now woven into ropes, to support the center. After three hours, including a break for lunch, the bridge was complete and Isi’s attentions were taken up with his next cigarette.

## DESIGNING BY DOING

The contrast between the two projects was immediately obvious. On one hand, the Apir Long Da’an suspension bridge had been progressing slowly, beginning with that rough sketch drawn by Ganang. On the other, the apir bulu’ (bamboo bridge) was thrown up without fuss and with very little discussion, each person knowing what needed to be done and apparently able to turn his hand to it. The traditional bridge lacked the uncertainties of the new; its principles had been honed by generations of Kelabit, each overlapping with the next in a continual fl ow of bridge-building expertise. By contrast the new bridge was still something of a trickle, various drips of approximate knowledge coalescing to form an emerging fl ow of experience and understanding.

With the introduction of new materials and tools, the uncertainties in production required a more formal design for the suspension bridge. This in turn defi ned certain actions, such as the acquisition of suitable materials and identifying and gathering useful skills, specialized tools, and so on. Unlike the traditional bridge, in the initial phases there was a distinct separation between design and production: acts of production were imagined as future activities in the abstract, rather than grounded in experiential knowledge. In the course of production, these abstract uncertainties came to the fore and became focal points for the generation of new techniques and experiences. In effect the distance between design and production was progressively reduced to the extent that the Kelabit engineers, in their designing-by-doing, merged the two activities into a single performance. Although the design phase of the project could be likened to Norman or Petroski’s industrial view of engineering, in practice it played out as an act of craftsmanship. The constant need for adjustments was driven by a nuanced understanding of the potentials of materials and environment. The design acted as a resource rather than a blueprint for action (Suchman 1987), a point of departure rather than a fi nal destination.

Conversely the traditional bridge crafted from local materials was in some ways more industrialized. The mass production of bamboo bridges is a routinized activity for the Kelabit with quite rigid guidelines, in the same way as other industrial commodities might be mass produced. The scope for fl exibility in design and construction techniques is limited by cultural and historic factors, largely removing any uncertainties from the process. The mutual effect of materials and skilled maker, framed by specifi c environmental circumstances (Ingold 2000), the craftsman’s perspective, which we might have assumed applies to the bamboo bridge, does not fi t this situation any more closely than the industrial engineering perspective of the new bridge. Craftsmanship and industrialization were not distinctly separate.

The act of doing contributes signifi cantly to any design, as can be seen in these two different projects. An unfamiliar object begins as an imagined concept, but in the course of production, as solutions to unforeseen problems are devised, the original idea is diluted or diverted. The design is effectively postconceived, the idea of the bridge and the process by which it is made coming about in tandem with, and subsequent to, the practices of production. On the other hand, building the familiar traditional bridge is a repeat of previous designs and activities. The basic idea is fi xed in the minds and bodies of Kelabit engineers; there is still a design, but it is a materially different form of design. Bamboo bridges as a tradition remain remarkably resilient, even in the face of new materials and techniques. No chainsaws were used in the making of this bridge, for example, and rattan tends to be used by default, only occasionally or later on replaced with wire. Continually “doing” the same design makes it increasingly habitual and less likely to change. Designing does not therefore require a special “designerly way of knowing” (Cross 2011), but depends instead on a designerly way of doing: design on-the-job, rather than in the mind.

## TOWARD AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF ENGINEERING

The space between design and production has been considered from various academic positions, including industrial design and commodity production (Norman), ecological responsiveness (Ingold), and a sociology of engineering (Bucciarelli). Each provides insights that are useful to understanding the ethnographic examples given here, but they are equally problematic in focusing on particular means and materials of production. As an anthropology of engineering, the Kelabit bridges blur easily accepted distinctions between nonindustrial craftsmanship and industrial design and production, as well as illustrate the differences between habitual and novel production.

Considering engineering as an anthropological topic allows us to adopt a position of cultural neutrality when investigating production practices. Engineering is a particular form of production, one often seen as synonymous with industrialism and mass-produced commodities rather than, more broadly, the communal construction of large-scale or complex objects. Such a close association of engineering with industrialization brings with it a number of consequences that need to be critically examined. The most signifi cant is multiple acts of separation: specialization of roles; corporate motivations remote from production activity; the natural from cultural environments; technology from the common man, and so on. Production generally and engineering specifi cally is seen in many different ways as separate from everyday cultural life, and yet that same everyday life is full of the work of the engineer and producer.

Industrial design and production as described by Norman (2004), for example, actively distinguishes between designer, producer, and user. The designer is seen as separate from the engineer, and hence the process of design is separate from that of production. Over time this has become something of a truism, such that the act of designing is considered a separate activity to production, requiring different, even special, skills (Cross 2011). However, extending this idea to nonindustrial contexts opens it up to question. In the Kelabit highlands, for example, the location and activities of engineering projects are integral to the life of the community. There is no translation or appropriation between designer, producer, or user.

The industrial concept of engineering resolves the differences between these separate actors and activities through negotiated compromise (Bucciarelli 1994; Petroski 1996), bringing together experiences, processed materials, and mechanical equipment in a controlled collaboration. This was also the basis of the Kelabit suspension bridge as a product of industrial materials, tools, and techniques. But rather than a negotiated plan or carefully controlled chain of actions, it depended on skill and innovation to overcome the many unpredicted complications. In effect it was an act of craftsmanship. It may be that the same could be said of all industrial engineering, but skilled practices are obscured by the proliferation of devices and systems, particularly in Western cultural circumstances.

By way of contrast, an object handmade of natural materials, is often seen (see Ingold 2000) as governed by the materials as much as the design. The craftsman depends on an empathetic understanding and a feeling for the raw materials to create his object, which, from an industrial perspective, is an activity more akin to artistry than engineering. As can be seen from the example of the bamboo bridge, this is not necessarily the case. That object, handmade from natural materials, was seen by the builders as prosaic and necessary, lacking the cachet of the modern bridge, and in some ways much closer to the concept of an industrial production.

For the Kelabit, building a bamboo bridge is a familiar performance and a regular part of life, something that happens at relatively frequent intervals. This is a mainstream activity, well established in social and technical terms. Groups of men will make this type of bridge from familiar materials in known ways, maintaining routines and traditions through repetition. This is an intuitive, embodied form of knowledge, where the design is quite fi rmly fi xed through repeated acts of making, and not the result of an abstract preconception. Their standard way of making is detailed and yet fl exible enough to cope with differences in site conditions or unforeseen problems. The new suspension bridge is a more uncertain concept, whose planned outcome is much less familiar and thus in the course of its construction encounters greater degrees of uncertainty. The design in this case emerges during construction, beginning as a vision and a formal plan of action that is then discarded in the wake of uncertainty as the producers grapple with new problems. Not only is the design incomplete and unable to anticipate the object, but more fundamentally it is inseparable from the performance of production.

As an alternative to the industrial perspective or production-as-craftsmanship, an anthropology of engineering can use examples such as the construction of these two bridges to offer useful insights into the relationship between design and production. Dominant concepts of production, such as industry or craft, include specifi c notions that are not necessarily universal, as demonstrated by the mass-produced bamboo bridges and the craftsmanship inherent in the new suspension bridge. Despite the material differences between these bridges, seen in the planning, components, tools, and techniques, both demonstrate that production incorporates aspects of designing and making. Design and production are not separate activities, nor is design an act of preconception; instead it would be more accurate to say that designing happens on the go and in the hand: Design, in other words, does not exist per se, but only as part of the performance of making.

## NOTES

1. These are of course by no means the only examples of the social sciences’ involvement with engineering. There is extensive literature in the history of technology, of which Petroski is a part (for example, 2012), and in science and technology studies, of which two more anthropological authors are Downey (1998) and Suchman (1987). Penny Harvey has also produced a number of ethnographic papers documenting road building in Peru (for example, see Harvey and Knox 2010), which foreground the cultural perception of civil engineering projects.

2. Fieldwork was carried out during an ESRC doctoral studentship at the University of Oxford, and as part of a wider AHRC-funded project—The Cultured Rainforest.

3. Suchman (1987) also questions the idea of a predetermined and complete plan, describing it more as a starting point from which subsequent actions take their cue.

## REFERENCES

Bucciarelli, L. L. (1994), Designing Engineers , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bucciarelli, L. L. (2002), “Between Thought and Object in Engineering Design,” Design Studies , 23: 219–231.

Cross, N. (2011), Design Thinking: Understanding How Designers Think and Work , Oxford: Berg.

Downey, G. L. (1998), The Machine in Me: An Anthropologist Sits among Computer Engineers , London: Routledge.

Harrisson, T. (1949), “Explorations in Central Borneo,” The Geographical Journal , 64: 129–149.

Harrisson, T. (1959), World Within: A Borneo Story , London: Cresset Press.

Harvey, P., and Knox, H. (2010), “Abstraction, Materiality and the ‘Science of the Concrete’ in Engineering Practice,” in T. Bennett and P. Joyce (eds.), Material Powers: Cultural Studies, Histories and the Material Turn, London: Routledge, 124–141.

Hebdige, D. (1988), Hiding in the Light , London: Routledge.

Ingold, T. (2000), The Perception of the Environment: Essays in Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill , London and New York: Routledge.

Ingold, T. (2007a), “Materials against Materiality,” Archaeological Dialogues, 14: 1–16.

Ingold, T. (2007b), “A Response to My Critics,” Archaeological Dialogues, 14: 31–36.

Janowski, M. (2003), The Forest, Source of Life: The Kelabit of Sarawak, London: British Museum Occasional Paper no. 143.

Lawson, B. (2004), What Designers Know , Oxford: Elsevier.

Lemonnier, P. (1992), Elements for an Anthropology of Technology, Ann Arbor: Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers no. 88.

Miller, D. (1991), Material Culture and Mass Consumption , Oxford: Blackwell.

Miller, D. (1995), “Consumption as the Vanguard of History: A Polemic by Way of an Introduction,” in D. Miller (ed.), Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of New Studies , London: Routledge, 1–52.

Miller, D. (2007), “Stone Age or Plastic Age?” Archaeological Dialogues, 14: 24–27.

Miller, D. (2009), Stuff , Cambridge: Polity Press.

Norman, D. A. (1998), The Design of Everyday Things , London: MIT Press.

Norman, D. A. (2004), Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things , New York: Basic Books.

Petroski, H. (1996), Invention by Design: How Engineers Get from Thought to Thing , Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.

Petroski, H. (2012), To Forgive Design: Understanding Failure, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.

Suchman, L. A. (1987), Plans and Situated Action: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
