> 来源：Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.)\Design Anthropology Theory and Practice (Smith, Rachel Charlotte Otto, Ton Gunn etc.).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Christina Wasson and Crysta Metcalf

As discussed in the introduction to this volume, design anthropology straddles two fi elds or research traditions with markedly different objectives, orientations, epistemic assumptions, and methods (see Otto and Smith, this volume). Combining the practices of anthropology and design across a university-industry partnership adds another layer of complexity to the equation for success. While other authors in this book speak to the challenges of combining anthropology and design, in this chapter we speak to the challenges of combining anthropology and design across organizations.

Like designers and anthropologists, universities and for-profi t industries often have different, sometimes competing, goals and purposes. For instance, collaboration between industry and universities can face obstacles because these organizations are driven by different incentive systems and different goals (Bruneel, D’Este, and Salter 2010). In some ways, these organizational differences overlap with the disciplinary differences between designers and anthropologists. While anthropology is present and past focused to develop a body of knowledge, design is future focused and the goal is to develop new products, services, and policies. Universities are usually producing knowledge for educational purposes, while industry is usually harnessing knowledge for profi t. While universities emphasize the creation of public knowledge, corporations often want to keep the knowledge they produce private. The goal of a for-profi t organization is, like design, to create products, while the product of academic research is knowledge. The fact that the two partners in any joint work have differing goals and objectives can, sometimes signifi cantly, reduce the likelihood of either side viewing the relationship as a success. Furthermore, research has shown that effective collaboration is even more challenging across organizations than across disciplines. For instance, a study by Cummings and Kiesler found that “projects with PIs [Principal Investigators] from more universities were signifi cantly less well coordinated and reported fewer positive outcomes” than projects with PIs from one university but multiple disciplines (2005: 703).

There is signifi cant evidence that university-industry partnerships have historically faced fairly high rates of failure, at least in the United States (see Baba 1988). This has prompted a change in how universities and industry are coordinating for collaboration. Since the 1980s, there has been more focus on creating institutional structures to help mitigate the challenges. According to Freitas, Geuna, and Rossi, “This qualitative change in the nature of the relationships between industry and academia has been accompanied by the emergence of visible new organizational forms such as university-industry liaison offi ces, technology licensing offi ces, technology transfer offi ces, industryuniversity research centres, research joint ventures, university spin-offs and technology consultancies” (2010: 3–4). And, despite the effort to formalize the collaborations, consulting work, and paid access to university research, success is still varied and occurs less often than all involved would hope (Freitas et al. 2010).

Two major types of barriers that hinder success have been identifi ed by Bruneel and colleagues (2010) as orientation-related barriers and transaction-related barriers. Orientation-related barriers are due to the different goals and objectives of universities and industry. Transaction-related barriers come into play with the advent of new institutional structures for university-industry collaboration, such as the technology transfer offi ces and others listed earlier. The barriers come from administrative and legal issues, such as who will retain intellectual property rights under what conditions. The development of technology licensing offi ces, technology transfer offi ces, technology consultancies, and so forth has corresponded to an increase in transaction-related barriers. Universities use these new organizational forms to capitalize on the commercialization of knowledge and produce fi nancial gain for the universities. In doing so, there is increased confl ict over intellectual property rights and the terms of the research partnership (Bruneel et al. 2010). For example, joint ventures and research centers can encounter competing interests when attempting to structure their agreements so that both the university and the organizational partner profi t from royalties. Pavese has suggested that successful industry-university partnerships require fi guring out “the right value proposition” (2009).

Before the development of these new industry-academic partnership models, the prior model of university-industry collaboration had been based on “ personal contractual collaborations between university researchers and fi rm engineers and researchers” (Freitas et al. 2010: 16; italics in original). In these cases, the relationships were not institutional as such; they were based on researchers’ social networks and the development of trust between the parties involved. The term contractual is used metaphorically rather than literally. It is our assertion that this earlier model actually works better than the newer model, at least in design anthropology partnerships.

Ours is a case study of successful personal contractual joint research between a professor and her class at the University of North Texas and a research scientist and her team at Motorola Mobility, Inc. We conclude that fi ve major factors contribute to successful university-industry design anthropology partnerships: 1) the multidisciplinary membership of the teams; 2) the close alignment between the interests and backgrounds of the lead researchers; 3) the high value students placed on these projects; 4) a strong commitment on the part of the lead researchers; and 5) their reliance on a personal contract model.

## THE HISTORY OF OUR COLLABORATION AND ITS INTERDISCIPLINARY CONTEXT

In the period from 2005 to 2011, we conducted fi ve collaborative class projects. In this section, we outline the history and practices of our collaboration and situate it in the context of multiple, intersecting forms of interdisciplinary practice(s). The two of us initially met at the spring 2004 annual meeting of the Society for Applied Anthropology. Immediately in our fi rst conversation, we started to explore the possibility of developing a collaboration in which Crysta, and through her Motorola, would be the client for a class project in Christina’s design anthropology course at the University of North Texas. 1 We remained in communication over the summer, and planned our fi rst collaboration for fall 2005. Thereafter, we usually collaborated on a class project every fall semester, with some variation due to adjustments to course schedules.

Here is a list of project topics and when projects were conducted:

• Eco-Moto (Fall 2005). An investigation of how the physical design of a mobile phone could communicate to consumers that this line of phones was ecologically friendly.

• Social Television Peripherals (Spring 2008). Motorola had developed design guidelines for a product that enabled friends and family who were geographically distant from each other to watch television together virtually. The class examined the design of remote controls, input devices, and presence indicators.

Supplemental Experiences (Fall 2008). A study of how people move back and forth between live experiences and on-screen experiences that supplement the live event by providing more information about it.

• Nonintrusive Notifi cations (Fall 2009). Another study related to social television, this time focusing on the design of notifi cations about people’s buddies that would appear on the television screen. Research was conducted to understand people’s perceptions of interruptions during leisure activities.

• Exploratory Kitchen Media Research (Fall 2011). An investigation of how people use media before, during, and after the cooking process.

During the fi rst class project in fall 2005, we experimented with our collaborative process, exploring ways to work together effectively. We both ended up feeling that the process as well as the results satisfi ed our respective needs, and were motivated to continue. The leader of the business group inside Motorola who was our ultimate client was very pleased with our work, generating recognition for us both inside and outside of Motorola. Subsequently our collaboration process remained fairly consistent in its general outlines, although we continued to refi ne our approach and each project had unique aspects. It was undergirded by our mutual commitment to a partnership in which we played equal but different roles, our willingness to be fl exible, and our readiness to invest a fair amount of time and energy into the project. When we started to plan a class project, Crysta usually suggested a few potential research topics that would contribute to ongoing activities within her organization, and together we selected the one that seemed like the best fi t for the class. We both contributed to the study design, methods, and protocols, with Crysta taking a lead role in the overall study design, and Christina understanding better how to adapt a study design to the context and constraints of a semester-long course.

Our compatibility as collaborators was facilitated by the specifi c characteristics of the organizations in which we worked and our roles within those organizations. Crysta worked in a research lab setting within Motorola. While Motorola went through various restructurings during the time period described, as of spring 2012, Crysta’s organization was called the Applied Research Center at Motorola Mobility, Inc. As a manager in a corporate research lab, Crysta’s role was to lead research projects that would generate ideas for new products and services. So the research projects Crysta suggested for the class fi t within a larger constellation of similar, ongoing research projects.

Christina was a professor in the department of anthropology at the University of North Texas (UNT). This department offered a master’s degree in applied anthropology, with the goal of training students who would become practitioners rather than academics. Client projects were regarded as a valuable aspect of students’ preparation for such careers. Furthermore, one of the specializations of the department was business anthropology, which included design and organizational anthropology. In fact, at the time of the writing of this chapter, UNT was the only university in the United States that offered a course on design anthropology within an anthropology department. So the master’s program attracted students who were interested in design anthropology. In addition, UNT’s design department had a signifi cant focus on design research. Faculty encouraged students to take the design anthropology course.

Our collaboration is situated within multiple, intersecting types of partnerships, including partnerships across institutional sectors, disciplines, and people. It is productive to examine interactions between the fi elds of anthropology and design in more detail, as they played out in the context of the class projects. The two fi elds were brought into dialogue in at least four ways: through the topics of the research projects; the composition of the class; Crysta’s team composition; and the partnership between the two of us.

First, while the research topics for each class project were unique, they all shared the overall goal of combining anthropological theories and methods with design theories and methods to create tangible product ideas. The research process was enriched by the multiple disciplinary backgrounds that students brought to it. The case study presented later in this chapter illustrates the process. Second, Christina strove to have each class consist of about half anthropology students and half design students. One of the pedagogical goals was to have design and anthropology students learn from each other and learn how to collaborate with each other. The class was primarily open to advanced undergraduates and master’s students in anthropology and design (UNT did not offer a PhD in anthropology). Christina also accepted a few doctoral students from fi elds such as marketing and information science. Total class size ranged from thirteen to eighteen students. Third, the team Crysta managed, and to whose ongoing research activities the class projects contributed, was highly interdisciplinary. In addition to an anthropologist and several designers, the team included engineers, computer scientists, and human-computer interaction specialists. The team had developed a highly collaborative research process in which all members of the team, regardless of training, participated. Computer scientists, designers, and other team members went into the fi eld and gathered and analyzed the data together with a trained fi eldworker; anthropologists, engineers, and others participated in the design process with the designers; and while prototyping was usually the purview of the computer scientists and engineers, they regularly consulted with the entire team to ensure the research prototypes were designed as planned and would answer the next set of research questions. The team had developed an interdisciplinary dialectical process that acted as a catalyst to inspire a collaborative culture of working relationships and an understanding of how to utilize the strengths of diverse disciplines (Metcalf 2008).

Fourth, while both of us were trained in anthropology, we each had extensive histories of working with designers and contributing to the interdisciplinary area that has been labeled design anthropology. Christina worked for E-Lab, a design fi rm that was a pioneer in incorporating ethnography into design research practice, from 1996 to 1997 (Wasson 2000, 2002; Wasson and Squires 2012). She subsequently taught design anthropology in collaboration with clients ranging from the Field Museum to Microsoft to the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, as well as maintaining a modest consulting practice. Christina was also a founding member of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference (EPIC) Steering Committee, one of the original six people who together developed the fi rst EPIC event (Anderson and Lovejoy 2005;

Wasson 2005). She remained on the steering committee until 2010; her roles included chair of academic relations. Crysta has worked for Motorola since 2000, where she pioneered an approach to the integration of ethnography, design, and engineering targeted to the specifi c context of Motorola products and services (Metcalf 2011). She both worked on and led crossdisciplinary teams for the entirety of her career at Motorola, mentoring and teaching others how to conduct successful interdisciplinary research and develop transdisciplinary teams.

These four areas of interdisciplinary interactions illustrate complex connections between people, disciplines, and institutions that overlap and intersect in multiple ways. Crysta and Christina were able to model their experience in crossdisciplinary partnerships to students; the students themselves learned about other disciplines from their classmates in the context of collaborating on a project that would be used by an interdisciplinary team. Furthermore, the fi elds of anthropology and design were not linked in a simple one-on-one dialogue surrounded by a vacuum; rather, they were connected to additional disciplines through the composition of the class as well as the membership of Crysta’s team.

## OBJECTIVES AND INCENTIVES

In this section, we describe ways in which our collaboration addressed the goals of Christina’s class and Crysta’s team, our own agendas, and the objectives of our organizations. With respect to class goals, it was an invaluable experience for students in an applied master’s program to work on a real client project; they were highly motivated by the awareness that their fi ndings would be used. Furthermore, they learned important skills in conducting client-centered research projects. While some of them had already conducted academic ethnographic research projects, they were new to the cultural logic of developing a research design targeted to the needs of a client organization, maintaining a focus on client priorities during the course of the fi eldwork, and engaging in an ongoing communication process with the client during analysis to ensure fi ndings were directed to the client’s needs. The class project helped us to bring students into the design anthropology/design research community of practice. In terms of relationality, it provided a vehicle for us to form a mentoring relationship with the students.

The goals of the interactive media user research (IMUR) team, Crysta’s team within the Applied Research Center at Motorola Mobility, Inc., are to develop a body of knowledge about how people interact with media, how they interact with each other around media, and how they communicate with each other through media. Most of the team’s research concentrates on innovations in video consumption and curation experiences, but includes research on photos, music, blogs, and books as well. The team seeks to understand people’s behavior with respect to professionally created content and usergenerated content in order to invent and design compelling consumer experiences. For the IMUR team, the value of collaborating with universities is threefold. First, there are a certain number of people on the team, and thus the number of projects that can be completed in any given year is limited. But the list of projects that the team is interested in conducting is fairly close to unlimited. University partnerships can enhance the team’s ability to acquire additional information about media behaviors through research partnerships. The second form of value obtained when partnering with a university is diversity of perspective. In spite of the fact that Crysta’s team is highly crossfunctional, university professors and students bring a fresh perspective to project defi nitions, research questions, and analysis that contributes greatly to innovative thinking. Third, the collaboration also establishes university ties that are respected in the larger research organization.

Our collaboration also contributed to Christina’s educational, research, and practice goals. Conducting applied research projects was central to her vision of how to train applied anthropology master’s students. At the same time, she enjoyed the opportunity to conduct research on particular aspects of sociality and technology use that she might not have previously encountered, but which fi t within the framework of her theoretical interests. As a professor, Christina did not have as much time to engage in applied projects as she would have liked, so the class projects were a valued way to maintain a foot in the world of practice. In addition, our collaboration contributed to the goals of Christina’s department, college, and university. As mentioned previously, the UNT Department of Anthropology had an applied focus and a business anthropology specialization; our class projects contributed to both of these areas (Jordan, Wasson, and Squires 2013; Wasson 2008). Furthermore, the department was housed in a unique college, the College of Public Affairs and Community Service. Essentially this was a school of applied social sciences; it included other departments such as criminal justice, public administration, and social work. Therefore the emphasis on providing students with applied experience was seen as a feather in the cap of the college, and the fact that the client was such a well-known company was regarded as an additional plus. Finally, the university administration placed a strong emphasis on partnerships between the university and outside organizations. One of the four goals of UNT’s 2012 Strategic Plan was to “partner with businesses and community groups to build and deepen meaningful relationships” that would strengthen the institution. 2

While universities most often regard university-industry partnerships as a benefi t for fi nancial reasons, our collaboration was somewhat different since it took place in the context of a class rather than a research grant or consultancy. The advantage for students and for the university was the experience that students obtained. We are often asked whether Motorola pays students for these class projects. The answer is no. Students should be motivated to take the class for the learning experience, not because they want to earn money. It would be unfair to compete with other classes where the client is a nonprofi t organization that cannot afford to pay, or where there is no class project. At the same time, Motorola did spend some money on these class projects. It paid for Crysta’s trips to Texas and the pizza party for students at the end of the semester, as described in the following section. In addition, Motorola paid the costs of data collection. For instance, study participants were always given an incentive to compensate them for their time, and on some projects we used a recruiting fi rm to fi nd study participants.

Another question that often comes up is whether students are required to maintain secrecy about the research fi ndings. Again, the answer is no, because the research was designed as a class project rather than a consultancy with a professor. On some projects, there was a legal agreement between Motorola and UNT, but it protected Motorola’s right to profi t from design ideas that emerged from the project. All legal agreements explicitly preserved the right to publish for Christina and the students. From Motorola’s perspective, a number of benefi ts for the corporation stemmed from establishing a university-industry partnership of the type that we engaged in. As part of the Applied Research Center, Crysta’s team has a number of mandates that result from its position within the larger corporation. Alongside developing design ideas that Motorola can profi tably use, one of the main goals is to produce patents, or intellectual property, that can be leveraged by the corporation. The team has regularly used the class’s research as the foundation for new product innovation. This is done without including the class in brainstorming activities and Motorola thus retains the value of any intellectual property that the IMUR team generates.

The IMUR team is also expected to create thought leadership within its respective communities of practice. This increases the visibility of Motorola and highlights the rigor and cutting edge nature of technology research in the company, and this in turn attracts talent to the organization. Dissemination of the team’s research, specifi cally publishing and speaking at conferences, is encouraged. This is why there is no obligation for Christina or the students to keep the research fi ndings secret; publication of research is seen as having value for the company.

In addition, research teams are expected to collaborate with other groups within the company, so the corporation can leverage their knowledge throughout the product development cycle. University-industry projects are always conducted with an eye to providing benefi t for other groups in the organization.

## CASE STUDY: KITCHEN MEDIA

With our respective goals in mind, and our history of successful collaborations, we decided to team up once again for a joint research project in the fall of 2011. This was a project examining how people use media in the kitchen, and serves as our case study of a successful university-industry partnership. From Crysta’s perspective, the IMUR team had been studying how people engage in television viewing experiences for a number of years (see, for example, Basapur et al. 2011; Harboe et al. 2007). These studies mainly focused on research in the living room or family room and how people engaged with the media and with each other when the primary task was watching television. However, the team knew it was missing a signifi cant amount of information on how people engage in media experiences when watching the screen is not the primary focus of attention. The team also wanted more information about media behaviors when the media experience was taking place in other contexts in the home and when more than one type of media was being used as part of an activity. Investigating how people use media in the cooking process, the IMUR team believed, would serve as a good fi rst step in looking at different media consumption contexts within the home. Crysta’s team proposed that media use in the cooking process would be interesting because in the United States many people have televisions in their kitchens, and people utilize their smartphones and tablets in the kitchen and during the cooking process as well. The kitchen is also a social location, and the process of cooking is a social process, which means that if people were engaging in media experiences, they would be likely to be engaging in social activities as well (Grimes and Harper 2008; Svensson, Hook, and Coster 2005). Finally, the cooking experience was selected because the IMUR team expected the primary focus of activity to change during the process. They expected more shifting back and forth between tasks and between different types of media than when someone sits down in the living room to watch a program.

Crysta and Christina discussed the possibility of ethnographic-style research exploring kitchen media use and agreed this project would be good for university collaboration because it was a new domain area of research for both Crysta’s team and Christina’s class. From Crysta’s point of view, it was a good topic because the students would not need a deep and nuanced understanding of the space and history of IMUR research to come up with fi ndings that would be new and interesting to Motorola. What were the patterns in how people used media in the cooking process? Did people use more than one device to create, curate, and/or consume media while in the kitchen? What types of media were consumed in the kitchen—were they food or kitchen specifi c? Answers to any of these questions would help Crysta’s team understand this space better and help it devise follow-on research. From Christina’s point of view, exploratory kitchen media research seemed like a great topic because she was confi dent that students would be able to connect with it easily and become enthusiastic conducting fi eldwork. After all, food preparation and eating are fundamental human experiences. In most cultures, certainly in ours, they evoke powerful emotions and feelings of connection with family and community (Mintz and Du Bois 2002).

We developed plans for the kitchen media project during the summer of 2011. Crysta wrote drafts of the research design and interview guide; Christina suggested minor edits. Christina developed the course syllabus, which operationalized the research design into a series of specifi c assignments for students. Crysta hired the recruiting fi rm to fi nd the participants and acquired the participant incentives. Once class had started, Christina worked with students to create a password-protected website for fi eldwork data on WordPress. Crysta visited the class in person three times over the course of the semester. First was an introductory visit in the second week. Second was a midpoint check-in during week nine. The last visit was during fi nals week; students delivered an oral presentation of their fi ndings and submitted a written report. Crysta expressed her appreciation to the class by throwing a pizza party at Christina’s house afterward. The students in this class included:

• Five undergraduate anthropology majors

• Two undergraduate communication design majors

• One undergraduate interdisciplinary arts and design/anthropology double major

• Three MA students in anthropology

• Two MFA students and one MA student in communication design

• One PhD student in marketing

• One PhD student in education.

The class was therefore mainly a mix of anthropology and design students, with a few students from other fi elds included for additional diversity and insights. This mix produced a productive interdisciplinary collaboration. The project benefi ted from the expertise of each discipline.

The class met one night a week for three hours. The fi rst half of each class meeting was dedicated to discussion of readings on the history, theory, and practice of design anthropology to ensure that students received an introduction to relevant literature. The second half of each class meeting was focused on project activities. Crysta participated in almost every class meeting. Since she was based in the Chicago area while students were meeting in the vicinity of Dallas, we used virtual communication technologies on the days when she was not physically present at UNT. A speakerphone sat in the middle of the circle of students, and we used desktop sharing to allow Crysta to see what was being shown on the computer in the classroom (visible to students through an LCD projector).

Christina taught students to follow E-Lab’s model of collaboration between anthropologists and designers. E-Lab was a pioneering design fi rm that played a leading role in bringing together ethnographic research and design in the 1990s. Christina assigned two articles that described E-Lab’s work practices and had the class discuss them at length (Wasson 2000, 2002). One useful tool for these class discussions was an image termed the “bow tie model” that illustrated a collaborative, interdisciplinary work process (Wasson 2002). According to this model, the fi rst half of the work process focused more on ethnographic research. It moved from the collection of instances—bits of data—through patterns across the data, to the development of explanatory frameworks. The frameworks were the center point or pivot of the work process. They were followed by more designfocused activities, fi rst the development of high-level design concepts and then actual prototypes. Christina explained that the class would not go as far along the design path as it could, because of time constraints; its work process would end with visualizations of design ideas. Christina also emphasized that a central principle of E-Lab’s work practices was that both researchers and designers should be members of a project team from beginning to end. Although researchers might play a lead role in the fi rst half, it was important for designers to participate in fi eldwork fi rst hand. And although designers might play a lead role in the second half, it was important for researchers to continue to assess emerging design ideas in light of the research fi ndings.

The course lasted for sixteen weeks—fi fteen weeks of class meetings followed by fi nals week (this is the standard semester length at American universities). The fi rst four weeks were spent in orienting students and training them in ethnographic fi eld methods. Then the students spent fi ve weeks conducting fi eldwork. Eight research participants who regularly used media to enhance their cooking experience were recruited. They were asked to take pictures documenting their media use and to draw a map of their kitchen showing the location of all media devices used during a particular cooking event. Then student researchers conducted open-ended, in-depth interviews with the research participants to learn more about their cooking-related media use. The students worked in pairs and video recorded the interviews. Interviews lasted one-and-a-half to two hours. The student researchers placed photos, maps, detailed fi eld notes about each interview, and extensive video clips from the interviews on a WordPress site that they created for the class. This made fi eld data available to the whole group for comparison and analysis.

All students working together as a group, with Christina as guide and facilitator, conducted much of the analysis during class time. The students presented fi ndings from their research over the course of four weeks. Each team of students verbally narrated its fi eldwork experience and illustrated key moments and insights with photos and video clips. Other students asked questions and discussed the fi eldwork. During this process, Christina noted examples and emergent insights in a Word document visible to the whole class via an LCD projector. Initially, the Word document functioned somewhat like a more sophisticated and deep version of a fl ipchart. As the Word document became longer, students started to group the ideas by having Christina cut and paste bits of text. Information was organized into the categories of instances, patterns, and design ideas. This process was somewhat similar to creating an affi nity diagram, moving to an increasingly sophisticated and abstract level of analysis. The class needed a portable analysis space because its meeting room was used by many other classes over the course of each week, so it could not store any data or analysis materials in the room. Over time topics emerged that became the chapters of a written report. Toward the end of the semester, students were asked to choose a chapter topic; chapter authors generally included a mix of anthropology and design students. They conducted further analysis of the data on their topic and developed design ideas based on the research fi ndings. In addition, one student took on the task of preparing a PowerPoint presentation.

While there is not space in this chapter to describe all of the fi ndings from the project, a few examples may be illuminating (Aiken et al. 2011). First, we found a strong connection between sociality, media use, and cooking. For instance, people built community by sharing recipes and pictures of dishes they prepared. Second, we developed an overall framework about the temporal cycle of cooking. The cooking experience could be understood as being composed of three stages: before, during, and after cooking; or, planning, execution, and celebration. Contrary to expectations, the use of media was most prevalent before cooking and after cooking. The before stage was characterized by the richest media use, as it included exploration activities that led to browsing and information searches. Furthermore, the after stage of one cooking experience was often the before stage of the next cooking experience, either for the same person or another person. Plate 30 shows one of the trajectories we mapped for the study participant, Michael. Third, we identifi ed three common orientations toward cooking among people who use media: the foodie orientation, the effi ciency orientation (often seen in parents of large families), and the health orientation. We termed these orientations rather than segments or personas because the same person might display different orientations or a mix of orientations depending on the circumstances (Aiken et al. 2011).

Based on these research fi ndings, students developed a number of interesting design ideas. For instance, to support sociality they designed a media device that would encourage and facilitate both physical and virtual social interactions before, during, and after the cooking experience. Specifi cally, they developed a stationary kitchen computer with the following capabilities, as illustrated in Plate 31 :

• The ability to mount the screen onto any fl at surface (kitchen cabinet doors, refrigerators, walls, etc.) and to pivot it in different directions

• A touch screen interface system

• A wireless and waterproof keyboard for optional use

• A built-in camera on the computer screen

• A voice command option

• Ahe capability to sync the stationary or “main” computer with other media (phones, tablets, laptops, desktops) (Aiken et al. 2011).

## CONCLUSIONS

This project was extremely successful from both Crysta’s and Christina’s perspectives. Crysta’s team utilized the fi ndings of the study to greatly enhance its understanding of media use in context and also disseminated the research to other groups within the company who were producing products geared toward the kitchen context. Immediately after the research project was over, others in Motorola Mobility’s Applied Research Center were requesting the results, and one member of another team sat in on the fi nal presentation. From the UNT perspective, indications of the project’s success included the positive evaluations given to the course by students; the opportunity for several students to present a paper on the project at the next meeting of the American Anthropological Association; and encouragement from the leadership of the National Association for the Practice of Anthropology (NAPA) to apply for the NAPA Student Achievement Award.

We think a number of factors played into the success of this and previous design anthropology projects conducted jointly by UNT and Motorola. We also believe that taking into consideration these fi ve factors, collaborative success can be replicated. First, both teams on the project were multidisciplinary. Both the class and the IMUR team had designers, social scientists, and others whose perspectives and goals needed to be understood and accommodated as part of the teaming process. This difference in perspectives and goals is similar to the differences in perspectives and goals of UNT and Motorola, as described in the introduction. Thus the students and researchers were already familiar with negotiating differences in product orientation versus knowledge production orientation, because they had to accommodate that in their team building. When it came to accommodating the differences in perspectives and goals among institutions, it was already familiar territory. Second, the two of us as project leaders have aligned interests and backgrounds. As described previously, our partnership meshes well with our professional priorities and our other work activities, as well as those of the organizations in which we work. We both have many years of working at the intersection of anthropology, business, design, and technology. In addition, our professional circles overlap quite a bit. For instance, Marietta Baba, who was Crysta’s dissertation advisor, has also informally mentored Christina for many years. A third factor that contributes to our successful partnership is that students greatly value the experience of participating in client-oriented class projects. They see the benefi ts of gaining marketable skills in design research, being able to list the project on their resume, and, for the design students, adding the designs they create to their portfolios. They also appreciate the skills they learn with regard to teamwork, collaboration across disciplines, connecting research insights with design ideas, and organizing a research process around client needs. Thus the students are motivated to do well on the project. In addition, the interactions between the two of us model an effective and constructive client-consultant relationship. Many students have had little exposure to such relationships beforehand, or have primarily encountered negative interactions between clients and consultants. A fourth element in the success of our partnership is our willingness to dedicate quite a bit of time and energy to the collaboration. We both demonstrated a high level of commitment to the project, which was visible to each other. For instance, Crysta displayed dedication through her willingness to give up one evening a week of her personal time, for sixteen weeks running, to participate in class meetings. Christina put quite a bit of effort into project management, ensuring that students carried out their research responsibilities in a timely manner, guiding the analysis process, and encouraging constructive teamwork among students.

Finally, it is our assertion that the collaborative research effort was successful because we based it on the personal contract model. The problem with the transaction-based approach that uses institutional structures for knowledge transfer, according to Freitas et al., “is that it ignores the specifi cities of the socio-economic-institutional context and the fi elds of research” (2010: 13). Instead of relying on institutionalized structures and marketbased contracts for knowledge transfer, we relied on our own long-standing personal relationship based upon feelings of trust and obligation, feelings that stemmed, in part, from belonging to the same social and professional networks. Our partnership was, and is, a personal, socially situated contract, not a market contract with its associated administrative and legal challenges. It is well known in psychology and economics that when people view an interaction in market terms, they are willing to pay a (literal) price for not meeting their obligations, and are more willing to end tasks (see, for example, Frey and Jegen 2001; Gneezy and Rustichini 2000). On the other hand, when people view their interaction as part of a personal contract, part of having a relationship with the other person, then their actions are regulated by social norms— in which not meeting obligations or ending a research collaboration has social consequences. In this case, we did not want to violate our personal contract by letting each other down. Thus we were motivated to put more effort into making the joint interorganizational research project successful as part of our personal obligations to one another.

It is our hope that this short description of our partnership can be useful to others seeking to initiate academic-industry collaborations in design anthropology. We recognize that each partnership has unique dimensions and that different models of industry collaboration have evolved across the various programs that offer a specialization in design anthropology, such as SPIRE at the University of Southern Denmark, Design at the Swinburne Institute of Technology, and Design Ethnography at the University of Dundee. These programs vary, among other things, in the degree to which they emphasize preparation for a career in application, their housing in different disciplinary contexts, and the national educational traditions within which they are situated. Nonetheless, we expect the industry collaborations that they consider most successful share considerable similarities with our own experiences.

## NOTES

1. The most recent syllabus for the design anthropology course, as well as other course materials, can be viewed at http://courses.unt.edu/cwasson/ courses/design-anthropology.

2. See http://www.unt.edu/features/four-bold-goals/.

## REFERENCES

Aiken, J., Burns, M., Brazell, B., Carranza, R., Dennis, R., Dubois, J., Hicks, J., Lomelin, M., Maxwell, M. L., Orange, E., Paquette, A., Reed, S., Roswinanto, W., Schlieder, V., Wilson, S. K., and Yang, X. H. (2011), “Exploratory Kitchen Media Research,” Report for Crysta Metcalf, Applied Research Center, Motorola Mobility Inc., by Design Anthropology Class, University of North Texas.

Anderson, K., and Lovejoy, T. (eds.) (2005), Proceedings of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference , Redmond, WA, November 14–16 .

Baba, M. L. (1988), “Innovation in University-industry Linkages: University Organizations and Environmental Change,” Human Organization, 47(3): 260–269.

Basapur, S., Harboe, G., Mandalia, H., Novak, A., Vuong, V., and Metcalf, C. (2011), “Field Trial of a Dual Device User Experience for iTV,” in Proceedings of EuroITV , Lisbon, Portugal, June 29–July 1, 127–136.

Bruneel, J., D’Este, P., and Salter, A. (2010), “Investigating the Factors that Diminish the Barriers to University-industry Collaboration,” Research Policy, 39(7): 858–868.

Cummings, J. N., and Kiesler, S. (2005), “Collaborative Research across Disciplinary and Organizational Boundaries,” Social Studies of Science, 35(5): 703–722.

Freitas, I.M.B., Geuna, A., and Rossi, F. (2010), “University-industry Interactions: The Unresolved Puzzle,” Working Paper Series , Department of Economics, University of Torino.

Frey, B. S., and Jegen, R. (2001), “Motivation Crowding Theory,” Journal of Economic Surveys , 15(5): 589–612.

Gneezy, U., and Rustichini, A. (2000), “A Fine Is a Price,” Journal of Legal Studies , 29(1): 1–17.

Grimes, A., and Harper, R. (2008), “Celebratory Technology: New Directions for Food Research in HCI,” in CHI 2008 , Florence, Italy, April 5–10, 467–476.

Harboe, G., Massey, N., Metcalf, C., Wheatley, D., and Romano, G. (2007), “Perceptions of Value: The Uses of Social Television,” in The 5th European Interactive TV Conference, 2007 , Amsterdam, May 24–25, 116–125.

Jordan, A., Wasson, C., and Squires, S. (2013), “Business Anthropology at the University of North Texas,” in P. Sunderland and R. Denny (eds.), Handbook of Anthropology in Business , Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.

Metcalf, C. (2008), “Interdisciplinary Research, Anthropological Theory and Software Innovation: Bringing It All Together,” paper presented at the Society for Applied Anthropology Meeting, Memphis, TN , March 28.

Metcalf, C. (2011), “Circulation of Transdisciplinary Knowledge and Culture in a High Tech Organization,” Anthropology News , 52(2): 28.

Mintz, S. W., and Du Bois, C. M. (2002), “Anthropology of Food and Eating,” Annual Review of Anthropology , 31: 99–119.

Pavese, K. E. (2009), Introduction to The New York Academy of Sciences Webseminar Academic-industry Collaboration: Best Practices. Available at: www. nyas.org/Events/WebinarDetail.aspx?cid=d774f799-36cf-4982-87faed2d9f6c9896. Accessed October 26, 2012.

Svensson, M., Hook, K., and Coster, R. (2005), “Designing and Evaluating Kalas: A Social Navigation System for Food Recipes,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 12(3): 374–400.

Wasson, C. (2000), “Ethnography in the Field of Design,” Human Organization, 59(4): 377–388.

Wasson, C. (2002), “Collaborative Work: Integrating the Roles of Ethnographers and Designers,” in S. Squires and B. Byrne (eds.), Creating Breakthrough Ideas: The Collaboration of Anthropologists and Designers in the Product Development Industry , Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 71–90.

Wasson, C. (2005), “Celebrating the Cutting Edge,” in Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference , Redmond, WA, November 14–16, 140–145.

Wasson, C. (2008), “A ‘Dreamcatcher’ Design for Partnerships,” in E. K. Briody and R. T. Trotter (eds.), Partnering for Organizational Performance: Collaboration and Culture in the Global Workplace, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 57–73.

Wasson, C., and Squires, S. (2012), “Localizing the Global in Technology Design,” in C. Wasson, M. O. Butler, and J. Copeland-Carson (eds.), Applying Anthropology in the Global Village, Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 251–284.

# Decolonizing Design Innovation: Design Anthropology, Critical Anthropology, and Indigenous Knowledge

Elizabeth (Dori) Tunstall

This chapter proposes the methodology of design anthropology as an answer to how one might create decolonized processes of design and anthropological engagement. I fi rst set out the contexts for the need for decolonized anthropology and design innovation (for instance, the use of design principles and frameworks to generate new or improved business outcomes). I then go on to explore what design anthropology is, its intellectual foundations and its principles, and to describe the fi rst phase of the Aboriginal Smart Art project as a case study of its principles in practice.

## THE CONTEXT FOR DECOLONIZATION

In 1991, Faye Harrison published the edited volume, Decolonizing Anthropology, in which she and a group of “Third World peoples and their allies” sought: “To encourage more anthropologists to accept the challenge of working to free the study of humankind from the prevailing forces of global inequality and dehumanization and to locate it fi rmly in the complex struggle for genuine transformation” (Harrison 2010: 10).

In 1991, I had taken my fi rst anthropology course at Bryn Mawr College in the United States. There I learned that the founding fathers of physical anthropology did not think I had the cranial capacity to even be in my class because I was an African American and thus of low intelligence. In spite of that fi rst encounter with anthropology, I stuck with it because there was something powerful about a fi eld devoted to investigating the expanding notions of what it means to be human. But the classical anthropological framing of my peoples, Africans and African Americans, as objects of anthropological inquiry required that I take seriously anthropology’s role in the project of colonialism, and also the role of design innovation in continuing projects of neocolonialism and imperialism.

The phrase “handmaiden of colonialism” to describe anthropology is attributed to anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss (Asad 1973). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Kohn 2011) defi nes colonialism as “a broad concept that refers to the project of European political domination from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries that ended with the national liberation movements of the 1960s.” It distinguishes colonialism from imperialism: with colonialism theoretically aligned with settlement and direct control and imperialism aligned with economic exploitation and indirect control. A wide range of anthropologists in the 1960s and 1970s began to directly address anthropology’s implication in colonialism and imperialism. While review of this literature is outside the scope of my chapter (see Uddin 2005 and Restrepo and Escobar 2005 for two exhaustive accounts), the points of criticism leveled against anthropology can be summarized as:

• classifi cation of peoples, such that it overdetermined their characters and undermined their own self-defi nitions (Deloria Jr. 1988 [1969]; Hall 1992; Said 1978; Smith 1999);

• framing or representation of peoples as reduced “others” and outside the pale of time, civilization, and rationality (Fabian 1983; Smith 1999; Wolf 1982);

evaluation of peoples in a hierarchy with European Caucasians in the top position of humanity and others ranked at various levels of subhumanness (Blakey 2010; Smith 1999); and

• lack of utility of its outputs, in the form of text-based ethnographies or fi lms, for improving the quality of life of the peoples engaged as its anthropological objects/subjects (Deloria Jr. 1988 [1969]; Smith 1999, Tax 1975).

These four kinds of critique represent the hallmarks of colonial, imperialist, and neocolonial anthropology for many indigenous, minority, migrant, and other marginalized communities who have been “coded into the Western system of knowledge” (Smith 1999: 43). What does this have to do with design innovation and design anthropology? As I stated earlier, my personal engagement with the fi eld of anthropology has been about trying to create a space for a decolonized anthropology in light of the discipline’s history. It has now also become about securing a space for decolonized design innovation practices.

The Oslo Manual defi nes innovation as “the implementation of a new or signifi cantly improved product (good or service) or process, a new marketing method, or a new organizational method in business practices, workplace organization, or external relations” (OECD 2005: 6). Embedded in this defi nition of innovation, which I argue is hegemonic in the fi eld, are three assumptive paradigms as it relates to culture. First, individual elites or companies generate innovation (Brown and Ulijn 2004; Jostingmeier and Boeddrich 2005; Light 2008). There is a growing discussion of grassroots innovation that links sustainable consumption with community action (Seyfang and Smith 2007), but it represents only an emergent thread in the innovation discourse. Second, innovation promotes modernist values. Spanish philosopher Rosa Maria Rodriguez Magda (2004) states how innovation was “the very driving force of modernity,” which sought to replace old ways of knowing. Third, innovation benefi ts individual companies, individual entrepreneurs and inventors, or the undifferentiated masses of society. Design innovation, even within the social sector, refl ects the modernist agenda of OECD defi nitions of innovation.

In 2010, on his Fast Company blog, Bruce Nussbaum posed a question to the design community that had never been broached so directly: “Is humanitarian design the new imperialism?” The article raised provocative questions about the ethics of humanitarian design projects such as Project H, Acumen Fund’s Water Project in India, and One Laptop Per Child: “Are designers the new anthropologists or missionaries, come to poke into village life, understand it and make it better—their modern way?” (Nussbaum 2010a: 1). The response from diverse sectors of the design community was swift as those such as Emily Pilloton of Project H (2010) dismissed Nussbaum’s article as a gross oversimplifi cation of their on-the-ground-work with communities. Niti Bhan, the only commentator whose non-Western voice in the debate was promoted in the Design Observer round up (Editors 2010), reminded people from the OECD world that, to paraphrase, mutual respect, reciprocity, and political history and reality were not acknowledged in the issues raised. How could it be otherwise? Who are the generators, what are the underlying values, and who are the benefi ciaries of innovation remain the issues for design innovation as a subset of the innovation discourse. Nussbaum’s two follow-up articles partly opened up these issues. The fi rst one raised the specter of the “unintended consequences” of humanitarian design by probing the underlying values and the true benefi ciaries of design innovations in the social sector (Nussbaum 2010b). The second one provocatively opened the issue of the origins of innovation by showing how humanitarian designers forge relationships with local elites (Nussbaum 2010c). This focus on local elites is important because it is they who determine, not those from the OECD world, whether design innovation is the handmaiden of colonialism or imperialism today. What is it that they say? What might be their critiques of design innovation?

Surprising, in the major academic journals on design (for example Design Issues and Design Studies), there is limited discussion by Asian, African, Middle Eastern, or Latin American scholars of design and imperialism or colonialism. Main critiques of imperialism and colonialism are written by Caucasian scholars in ex-colonial peripheries of Australia (Fry 1989) and South Africa (Van Eaden 2004). Exceptions are found in the 1989 Design Issues special issue on “Design in Asia and Australia” with the contributions of Shou Zhi Wang (1989) on modern Chinese design and Rajeshwari Ghose (1989) on design and development in Asia, with a focus on India. Ghose’s article in particular outlines a critique of design and development’s ideological biases in how it classifi es, represents, models, and evaluates the Indian nation and people. She states:

No wonder then that neither of the terms design nor development have natural equivalents in most of the Asian linguistic traditions, for they carry with them all the ideological underpinnings of First World associations, aspirations, and debates. This realization and, more recently, the deep dissatisfaction that has followed this realization, both from an ideological/cultural as well as a pragmatic point of view, has led to some very serious soul searching among the thinking designers of Asia in recent years. (1989: 39)

Outside of academic journals, one fi nds strong critical voices on design and development in blogs and conference presentations by design scholars and practitioners such as Arvind Lodaya, M. P. Ranjan, and Niti Bhan of India, Ravi Naidoo of South Africa, Adelia Borges of Brazil, and Benny Ding Leong of China. Their points of critique are similar to those against anthropology in terms of how hegemonic discourses of design and innovation:

• classify traditional craft as distinct from modern design, excluding the histories and practices of design innovation among Third World peoples (and their allies especially in regards to their responses to colonialism, imperialism, and neocolonialism) (Borges 2007; Ghose 1989; Lodaya 2003; Ranjan and Ranjan 2005);

• frame design thinking as a progressive narrative of global salvation that ignores the alternative ways of thinking and knowing of Third World peoples and their allies (Leong and Clark 2003; Lodaya 2007);

evaluate European, Euro-American, and Japanese design and innovation as the top of the design innovation hierarchy (Jepchumba 2009; Leong and Clark 2003; Lodaya 2006; Ranjan 2006); and

• utility of outputs because many design innovations are prototypes that have not been fully implemented, and thus have limited positive impact on communities.

A high-profi le example of how design innovation can act in an imperialist way is the IDEO and the Rockefeller Foundation’s Design for Social Impact initiative. The next section will briefl y introduce the project and how it relates to the points of critique outlined previously.

## THE IMPERIALISM OF DESIGN

In 2008, the Rockefeller Foundation invited IDEO, a global design consultancy, to explore how “design and how the design industry can play a larger role in the social sector” (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a: 5). The fi rst outcomes of this study were the Design for Social Impact How-to Guide (2008a) and the Design for Social Impact Workbook (2008b). Both texts seek to demonstrate how design thinking as a human-centered design process can contribute to “transformation change in communities” (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a: 2). Although the initiative is focused on communities, it follows the hegemonic paradigm of innovation in terms of its framing of who generates innovation, its underlying values, and who benefi ts.

In the Design for Social Impact initiative, Western design companies generate innovation, which places them at the top of the design innovation process. The texts are “intended for design companies of any size or type,” to guide them so that they can sell their services to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and start-ups that operate in the social innovation sector, mostly in India and South Africa (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a: 4). Through a content analysis of the photographic images, illustrations, and texts of the Design for Social Impact How-to Guide, I found that Western design companies are represented as active agents who guide, serve, embed, build, pay, and staff (the design processes). On the other hand, Indian and African institutions are represented as those to be passively guided and directed or to serve as sabbatical hosts, sites for capacity building, philanthropic tourist destinations, and support staff for projects (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a). Why does it matter that Indian and African (not to mention Chinese, Brazilian, Mexican, and other non-OECD nations) design companies are not also the audiences for the How-to-Guide? Ghose discusses how Asian design is directly tied to issues of “technology/design transfers from the First World, as well as problems associated with adapting new or changing technology to diverse economic, social, cultural, and political conditions” (1989: 32). By framing non-Western design companies outside of the discourse of Design for Social Impact, the IDEO document positions Western design companies in a unique hierarchical position enabling them to guide non-Western institutions on how to solve problems. This elides the history of non-Western design innovation in which designers in India and Africa have creatively responded to the challenges posed to their communities, often in connection with processes of imperialism, colonialism, and neocolonialism.

In the Design for Social Impact initiative, values of design thinking draw from a progressive narrative of global salvation that ignores non-Western ways of thinking rooted in craft practices that predate yet live alongside modern manufacturing techniques. The general absence of Indian, African, Asian, Middle Eastern, or any other non-Western knowledge, with the exception of C. K. Prahalad, in the over twenty bibliographic and Internet resources at the end of the How-to Guide refl ects the disregard for local knowledge and the intention to supplant it with Western design thinking as the dominant methodology (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a). In a World Bank Institute article entitled “Design Thinking for Social Innovation: IDE,” Tim Brown and Jocelyn Wyatt describe the specifi c contributions of design thinking to social challenges. “As an approach, design thinking taps into capacities we all have but that are overlooked by more conventional problem-solving practices . . . [It] relies on our ability to be intuitive, to recognize patterns, to construct ideas that have emotional meaning as well as being functional, and to express ourselves in media other than words or symbols” (2010: 30). Brown and Wyatt (2010) posit design thinking as an alternative to linear, rational, and conventional approaches to problem solving. In its human-centered approach, design thinking is said to respect local knowledge through its processes of gathering user needs and codesigning through iterative prototyping. Yet postcolonial and feminist critiques of Western models of linear and rationalist thinking have been well established since the 1960s and predate IDEO’s design thinking. In fact, design thinking sounds similar to what Rajeshwari Ghose expressed in the late 1980s as the task of Asian designers: “Here too [Asian] designers have the dual task of documenting and understanding ethnicity and regional cultures, for understanding them is the essential fi rst step to evolving a medium of visual communication and restoring local confi dence in an age when traditional institutions are crumbling fast and benefi ts of industrialization are yet to trickle down” (1989: 40–41).

While design thinking represents an advance in Western business thought, what does it mean to bring design thinking to places that already have their own indigenous forms of thinking also critical of linear and rational models? Saki Mafundiwa raises this issue in his description of the epiphany that inspired him to create ZIVA, the Zimbabwe Institute for Vigital Arts:

These were Afrikan-trained designers—unlike me, an Afrikan trained in the west. Soon I realized that force-feeding Afrikans design principles born in Europe, principles that were the product of the European experience, just doesn’t work . Afrikans have their own palettes that have no kinship with the principles of color devised by such schools of thought as the Bauhaus. Why do we ignore those? The rest of the world would love to understand this Afrikan sense of color! Tapestries woven by “unschooled” craftspeople grace some of the world’s major museums and private collections—stunning testimonials to the Afrikan creative genius. (Jepchumba 2009: sec. 1, par. 10)

Saki’s efforts to train his Afrikan students in Afrikan ways of knowing expose how, notwithstanding the good intentions by IDEO, bringing design thinking and other nonnative principles to India, Africa, or China, for example, risks becoming another form of cultural imperialism that destabilizes and undermines indigenous approaches coming out of other creative traditions. To this last point, Rajeshwari Ghose makes an important statement: “If design is perceived as an ancient activity that has gone on for several centuries rather than as a brand new profession, then our whole perception of what constitutes Asian design begins to change and, thenceforth, issues pertaining to Asian design assume different forms” (1989: 36).

In the Design for Social Impact initiative introduced earlier, the main benefi - ciaries of innovation are the participating companies and individuals as well as general society, while community benefi ts are limited by the lack of sustainable implementation of design prototypes. As outlined in the How-to Guide, each strategic approach is evaluated against its “benefi t to the company” and “social impact” (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a: 41). The benefi ts to the company are all clearly enunciated through the listing of what happens to each strategy when it works (for the company), both pros and cons. Although they defi ne social impact as the “capacity of this type of work to create positive social change on communities and individuals,” it is represented only as a graphical circle without descriptions of what that social impact might be (IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation 2008a: 41). More important, the Design for Social Impact initiative explicitly seeks to transfer the resources of philanthropic foundations and local NGOs to Western design companies. The extent to which this places the initiative in direct competition with local design companies means that while its intentions may be good, it outcomes are likely imperialistic. It resembles what Linda Smith refers to as the new wave of imperialist processes that “enter with goodwill in their front pocket and patents in their back pocket” (1999: 24). Thus, IDEO’s Design for Social Impact initiative demonstrates how even a design innovation project with good intentions can be implicated in continuing practices of imperialism. While IDEO is a good company representing good people-centered design processes, it fails to respect the value systems of those communities it seeks to help. Design anthropology is proposed as a methodology that can reframe both anthropology and design innovation as decolonized practices of cultural engagement.

## DESIGN ANTHROPOLOGY: A DECOLONIZED METHODOLOGY

Over the last seven years, I have defi ned, promoted, and taught design anthropology as a fi eld that seeks to understand how the processes and artifacts of design help to defi ne what it means to be human and that focuses on how design translates values into tangible experiences (Tunstall 2006, 2007, 2008a,b). I am proposing design anthropology as a methodology rather than a method, because what is at stake for me are the principles and rules for regulating the disciplines of design and anthropology to avoid neocolonization and imperialism. By decolonized, I refer to the status of being “self-governing or independent” (Dictionary.com). Thus, what I mean by a decolonized methodology is a system of methods, principles, and rules free from the biases of the last fi ve centuries of colonization and imperialism, and that thus contributes to the self-defi nition and self-determination of those formerly colonized. I seek to argue that design anthropology has great potential to become a decolonized methodology for engaging with social issues.

This, of course, is not the only defi nition of design anthropology. Sperschneider, Kjaersgaard, and Peterson defi ne it as the bricolage of “making sense of what is there with remaking what is there to something new” (2001: 1). The University of Aberdeen in its Masters of Science (Design Anthropology) program defi nes it as “a novel and exciting interface where the speculative imagination of possible futures meets the comparative study of human ways of living and knowing” (Leach 2011: sec. 1). Joachim Halse suggests that design anthropology is a provocation “that portrays the culture of use in terms of the culture of design” (2008: 31). Paula Gray defi nes it as “ethnographically-informed design of new products, services and systems for consumers and businesses” (2010: 1). Two aspects of my defi nition of design anthropology distinguish it from others. The fi rst is that my defi nition is not just about the application of anthropological theories and methods toward the better design of products, services, and systems. As I have stated elsewhere, “It allows for the possibility of saying stop to the design process” when the ethics of engagement are questioned (Tunstall 2008a: 28). The second is that “the outcomes of design anthropology include statements providing some deeper understanding of human nature as well as designed communications, products, and experiences” (Tunstall 2008b: sec. 1, par. 2). My defi nition of design anthropology draws from core sets of theoretical perspectives—the critical anthropology of “Third World peoples and their allies,” indigenous and Scandinavian traditions of cooperative/participatory design, and indigenous, critical, feminist, ontological, and phenomenological knowledge traditions. In the following sections, I address how this particular methodological positioning impacts the principles of design anthropology.

## PRINCIPLES OF DECOLONIZED UNDERSTANDINGS OF VALUE SYSTEMS AND CULTURES

In an article written for Adobe Think Tank, I argued that “Design anthropology does not place separate emphasis on values, or design, or experience, which are the domains of philosophy, academic design research, and psychology, respectively. Rather, design anthropology focuses on the interconnecting threads among all three, requiring hybrid practices” (Tunstall 2008b: sec. 5, par. 2). As a methodology, I propose a design anthropology that adheres to a set of seven principles regarding how one understands and positively impacts on (1) human value systems; (2) the processes and artifacts of designing in making value systems tangible; and (3) the aligning of people’s experiences with the values they prefer—all under conditions of unequal power relations. Fredrik Barth has been critical of how anthropologists have used the term values without creating an “explicit theory and analysis of values” (1993: 31). I utilize the term values in my explanation of design anthropology because it highlights the different perspective that anthropologists have brought in their engagement with the design industries (Tunstall 2006) and it states what is at stake in processes of decolonization (Smith 1999: 74). In the edited volume, Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century, Maria Bezaitis and Rick Robinson (2011) of E-Lab/Sapient argue that user research needs to get back to its emphasis on values as opposed to just being seen as valuable to industry. Thus, Bezaitis and Robinson contrast two of the three ways of talking about values noted by David Graeber. They promote what Graeber describes as values in the sociological sense “of what is ultimately good, proper, or desirable in human life” (Graeber 2001: 2) as opposed to the economic sense of measurement. What I have found most powerful about the role of anthropology in design is how it reveals the struggle over value systems as people seek to create meaning in their lives and pass them on to future generations. In this I share Barth’s notion that studying values in and of themselves is not “a productive strategy . . . but [as part of social action] directs our attention to an area where collective institutions and representations articulate with individual behaviours” (1993: 44). Here Ton Otto’s (2006) work about values and norms is illustrative. As the struggle over values affects people’s identities, it also directly affects their ability to pass on those values to future generations. The collective creation of meaning and passing on to future generations is what can be defi ned as culture. As a decolonized methodology, design anthropology draws upon the concept of value systems, which can become cultures through consensus and transmission into the future, expressed in Cuban anthropologist Fernando Ortiz’s theory of transculturation:

I am of the opinion that the word transculturation better expresses the different phases of the process of transition from one culture to another because it does not consist merely in acquiring another culture (acculturation) .  .  . but the process also necessarily involves the loss or uprooting of a previous culture (deculturation) . . . and it carries the idea of new cultural phenomena (neoculturation). (1995 [1945]: 102–103)

The theory of transculturation helps to defi ne three of eventually seven key principles I believe should guide the praxis of design anthropology when it comes to understanding and having positive impact on value systems:

• Value systems and cultures have to be accepted as dynamic, not static. Each generation goes through the process of negotiating the elements that make up its value systems and cultures.

• One needs to recognize the mutual borrowing that happens among value systems and cultures and to seek to mitigate or eliminate the unequal circumstances in which that borrowing takes place.

• One must look simultaneously at what is expressed as that to be gained, lost, and created new in the recombination of value systems and cultures by a group of people.

Adhering to these three principles addresses what Faye Harrison describes as the project of decolonizing anthropology by “demystifying hegemonic ideologies and producing/co-producing forms of knowledge that can be useful and potentially liberating for the world’s dispossessed and oppressed” (2010: 8). The Aboriginal Smart Art project on which I am working provides an example of these principles in action.

## THE ABORIGINAL SMART ART PROJECT

In 2011, Colin McKinnon Dodd of the Yamatji Aboriginal cultural group and the founder of the Aboriginal Artists Development Fund (AADF) asked me to conduct a project that would use technology to support Australian Aboriginal arts. The Koorie Heritage Trust, the peak Aboriginal institution in Victoria State, agreed to partner with the AADF and Swinburne University on a project focused on how indigenous knowledge belonging to Australian Aboriginal cultures can be used to create social, technological, and business innovations in the Victorian Aboriginal Art market that increase the holistic sustainability of Australian Aboriginal art-making communities. The project completed the fi rst of three phases, focused on researching cultural values and codesigning innovation scenarios, in May 2012. This is to be followed by the implementation and then the roll-out and evaluation phases. The project’s main aim embodies design anthropology’s fi rst principle by accepting the dynamic character of Australian Aboriginal culture. Lynnette Russell (2001) in her book Savage Imaginings discusses the way mainstream Australian society constructs Aboriginal culture as monolithic, located in the ancient past, and thus inauthentic if engaged with modernity. The Aboriginal Smart Art (ASA) project frames cultural diversity and hybridity as part of the dynamic nature of Aboriginal cultures. The contemporary living values of Australian Aboriginal storytelling and their Dreamtime (in other words lore guiding the interconnections between all things in the past and present) are not seen as anathema to modern technologies. The ASA project draws on the growing literature on Aboriginal communities and digital technologies that demonstrates the tremendous variability of intergenerational responses to technology in Aboriginal cultures (McCallum and Papandrea 2009; Samaras 2005; Verran and Christie 2007). As exemplifi ed in the 2010 AIATSIS symposium on Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities, indigenous communities have been increasingly using information and communication technologies to support (1) cultural mapping, managing, and archiving; (2) cultural innovation, transmission, and communication; and (3) language revitalization (AIAT-SIS 2010). The Aboriginal Smart Art project extends these digital practices into the Aboriginal art market, thus also embodying the second principle of the design anthropology.

The borrowing of digital technologies by Aboriginal communities and the borrowing of indigenous visual representations by dealers, buyers, and viewers in the Aboriginal art market represents the mutual borrowing of cultures and values under unequal circumstances. For the Aboriginal Smart Art project, the main challenge is the commodifi cation of Aboriginal artworks and exploitation of Aboriginal artists. Paraphrasing anthropologist Arjun Appadurai (2005: 34), I understand commodifi cation as a process in which things are exchanged with minimal formation of social bonds and groups. The media’s highlighting of the continued exploitation of Aboriginal artists by unscrupulous brokers, dealers, and gallery owners led to the development of the Indigenous Art Code in 2007. Yet the exploitation in the Aboriginal art market continues as manifested by the artwork being seen as objects for sale without connection to the artists, their families and communities, and the land. The Aboriginal Smart Art project seeks to eliminate the exploitation and commodifi cation of Aboriginal artists by codesigning innovative technologies, business, and service models to embed story into Aboriginal artwork. People are less likely to exploit another person with whom they have established deep bonds through knowledge of the deeper meanings of the artwork to the artists and their communities. Artists are less likely to sell a painting on the roadside if it also carries story and ceremony for their future generations. The project seeks to use the values associated with Aboriginal storytelling to reduce the unequal circumstances of Aboriginal artists’ participation in the Western art market by mainstreaming those values such that they change the business model for the market.

The Aboriginal Smart Art project embodies the third principle of design anthropology by examining what is gained, lost, and created anew by embedding story in Aboriginal art. Through the interviews with artists, art coordinators, gallery owners, wholesalers, and technical experts, the Aboriginal Smart Art team of researchers, students, and client partners learned about Aboriginal communities’ loss of revenue, cultural practices including storytelling, and identity caused by the exploitation of Aboriginal artists and their communities as a continuation of imperialism. The team learned what communities felt they did or did not have to gain from using the technologies to record the story of art making and how it differed for urban and rural artists. Yet the team learned what could be created new by bringing Aboriginal storytelling values and Western technological values together, which was represented through three design concepts with related business models and technological requirements. The 1D concept (see Plate 32 ) demonstrates the students’ understanding that communities are the fi rst point of authenticating Aboriginal artists’ use of specifi c motifs in the art and stories. The students explored how available technologies in Aboriginal communities such as smartphones could capture the art and story-making processes to be stored in a general database and embedded in the artwork itself through RFID chips and GPS image tracking. At the point of sale, viewers and buyers can access the story through a smartphone application.

## PRINCIPLES FOR DECOLONIZED DESIGN INNOVATION

The design of design anthropology is theoretically indebted to two areas of design theory and practice. The fi rst is the design thinking exemplifi ed in the works of such indigenous/Third World scholar/practitioners as Indian M. P.  Ranjan, Zimbabwean Saki Mafundikwa, and Native Hawaiian Herman Pi’ikea Clark. M. P. Ranjan clearly articulates a view of designing to which design anthropology seeks to speak directly:

Here we are proposing that the design action takes into account the structure of society along with their macro aspirations, their histories and cultural preferences as a starting point and from here build imaginative approaches for products, services and systems that would include the meta-system, the infrastructure, the hardware, the software and the processware to ensure a perfect fi t to the circumstances and requirements of the particular situation. (2011: sec. 1, par. 4)

The approaches advocated by these and other Third World scholars provide alternatives to the classifi cations and representations that see design primarily as a modern Western phenomenon by showing the long history of making in these communities. This provides another principle for design anthropology:

One should seek to eliminate false distinctions between art, craft, and design in order to better recognize all culturally important forms of making as a way in which people make value systems tangible to themselves and others.

The second area of design thinking and practice is the Scandinavian cooperative and participatory design (Bødker, Ehn, Sjögren, and Sundblad 2000; Buur and Bagger 1999). The results of the 1980s Utopia project as described by Bødker et al. inform design anthropology’s focus on “staging active design exercises such as the organisational tool-box and use of mock-ups and prototypes as a way to involve end users in design” (2000: 3). The work of Jacob Buur’s SPIRE research group has advanced these ideas to defi ne the praxis of participatory innovation. The principle that it provides to design anthropology is:

Researchers and designers ought to create processes that enable respectful dialogue and relational interactions such that everyone is able to contribute their expertise equally to the process of designing and those contributions are properly recognized and remunerated.

These two principles can be glossed as ensuring processes of inclusion into the formation of design concepts, prototypes, and implementation such that the benefi t of designing originates and ends with the groups involved, especially the most vulnerable group members. Here the Aboriginal Smart Art project again proves illustrative.

By seeking to embed the values of Aboriginal ways of visual culture as storytelling into a design project, the Aboriginal Smart Art project collapsed the distinctions between art, design, and craft (the fourth principle of design anthropology). Herman Pi’ikea Clark states that by creating the concept of art “no other pre-industrial society or culture in the world established a disassociated category for aesthetic objects as did Western European society” (2006: 3). While still using the term art, the Aboriginal Smart Art project attempts to transform aesthetic objects back to what Clark describes as their preindustrial roles as repositories, transmitters, and vehicles in the exploration and construction of knowledge (2006: 4). Aligning with the fi fth principle of design anthropology, the project’s two presentations and scenario codesign workshop created inclusive interactive forums in which Aboriginal artists, art coordinators, art collectors, business, technology, and design experts could contribute their knowledge to inform multiple scenarios for how the Aboriginal Smart Art processes might work. For the mid-semester presentations of learning from secondary research, the team used writing on sticky notes and directly on display banner posters to facilitate discussions of further directions for research to inform scenario planning. The scenario mapping and evaluation workshop demonstrated to the student team, the participating client, and the technical experts how complex and diverse were the possible solutions to the project’s challenges. In the fi nal semester presentation, participants, including Aboriginal artists, helped select which one of the three concepts the group will continue developing in phase two of the project. This process of inclusion will continue throughout phases two and three of the project.

## PRINCIPLES FOR DECOLONIZED RESPECT FOR EXPERIENCES

Design anthropology, as I defi ne it, comes directly out of my experiences of being an African American woman who has been trained in critical anthropology and applied that knowledge to the contexts of professional design and design education. It speaks to the heart of the atrocities of Western colonialism and imperialism, mainly the disrespect and disregard for the experiences of other people. Design anthropology enacts the critique of positionality and power articulated by Third World scholars, indigenous scholars, and second and third wave feminists by reframing the problem areas of social impact as within the value systems of imperialism. The design anthropology principle that emerges from this perspective is:

Projects should use design processes and artifacts to work with groups to shift hegemonic value systems that are detrimental to the holistic well-being of vulnerable groups, dominant groups, and their extended environments.

Last, design anthropology requires that individuals and groups move beyond having empathy to acting with compassion. In an essay for the tenth anniversary of the ICOGRADA Design Education Manifesto, I combine Richard Sennett’s (2003) defi nition of respect with Herbert Simon’s (1969) defi nition of design to provide a defi nition of respectful design as “the creation of preferred courses of action based on the intrinsic worth of all human, animal, mineral, fauna and fl ora and the treatment of them with dignity and regard” (Tunstall 2011: 133). The acceptance of the intrinsic worth of everything and the treatment of them with dignity and regard characterizes compassion, which is a higher virtue than empathetic shared feelings advocated in design thinking. Design anthropology’s fi nal principle seeks a commitment to compassion from its students, scholars, and practitioners:

The ultimate criteria for success of any design anthropological engagements are the recognized creation of conditions of compassion among the participants in a project and in harmony with their wider environments.

This may seem utopian, but it ensures that design anthropology understands its purpose as part of a spiritual system, not just an economic and social system. These last two principles require a longer time frame and greater scope for the praxis of design anthropology in order to build case studies. Yet at least anecdotally as I give presentations around the world, I am fi nding a shift already taking place in the ultimate purpose of design innovation and anthropology that closely aligns with these sentiments. Thus, I expect it will only be fi ve years or so before we have these clear case studies.

## CONCLUSION

By proposing design anthropology as a decolonized methodology, I return to where I began with Faye Harrison to advocate for design anthropology that frees its two parent fi elds from “the prevailing forces of global inequality and dehumanization and to locate it fi rmly in the complex struggle for genuine transformation” (2010: 10). Design innovation and anthropology have much that they can contribute to fi ghting global inequality, but fi rst it should adhere to clear principles of respectful engagement with people’s values, the translation of them through processes of inclusive codesign, and the evaluation of their effects on people’s experiences from the perspective of the most vulnerable. The seven principles of design anthropology can assist in the evaluation of one’s cultural interactions to ensure that one is avoiding the four imperialistic outcomes that others have critiqued in both anthropology and design innovation theories and practices. Having established these principles, I seek to focus on the implementation of design anthropology as a decolonized methodology through my projects and those of my allies and students. For what is needed now are clear case studies that demonstrate the creation of conditions of compassion as the true goal of any design anthropology engagement.

## REFERENCES

AIATSIS (2010), Program of 2010 Information Technologies and Indigenous Communities Research Symposium, AIATSIS, Canberra, July 13–16. Available at: www.aiatsis.gov.au/research/docs/iticPrelimProg.pdf. Accessed June 10, 2012.

Appadurai, A. (2005), “Commodities and the Politics of Value,” in M. M. Ertman and J. C. Williams (eds.), Rethinking Commodifi cation: Cases and Readings in Law and Culture, New York: New York University Press, 34–44.

Asad, T. (ed.) (1973), Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter, Ithaca, NY: Ithaca Press.

Barth, F. (1993), “Are Values Real? The Enigma of Naturalism in the Anthropological Imputation of Values,” in M. Hechter, L. Nadel, and R. Michod (eds.), The Origin of Values , Hawthorn, NY: Aldine de Gruyter, 31–46.

Bezaitis, M., and Robinson, R. (2011), “Valuable to Values: How ‘User Research’ Ought to Change,” in A. Clarke (ed.), Design Anthropology: Object Culture in the 21st Century , New York: Springer Wien, 184–201.

Blakey, M. (2010), “Man, Nature, White and Other,” in F. Harrison (ed.), Decolonizing Anthropology, 3rd edition, Arlington, VA: Association for Black Anthropologists, American Anthropological Association, 16–24.

Bødker, S., Ehn, P., Sjögren, D., and Sundblad, Y. (2000), Co-operative Design: Perspectives on 20 Years with ‘the Scandinavian Design Model, Stockholm, Sweden: Centre for User Oriented IT Design (CID). Available at: http://cid. nada.kth.se/pdf/cid\_104.pdf. Accessed May 6, 2012.

Borges, A. (2007), Design for a World of Solidarity. Available at: www.adeliaborges. com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/12–17–2007-forming-ideas-designsolidario1.pdf. Accessed May 10, 2012.

Brown, T., and Ulijn, J. (2004), Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Culture: The Interaction between Technology, Progress, and Economic Growth, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Brown, T., and Wyatt, J. (2010), “Design Thinking for Social Innovation: IDE),” World Bank Institute, beta , July 12. Available at: http://wbi.worldbank.org/ wbi/devoutreach/article/366/design-thinking-social-innovation-ideo. Accessed March 27, 2011.

Buur, J., and Bagger, K. (1999), “Replacing Usability with User Dialogue,” Communications of the ACM , 42(5): 63–66.

Clark, H. P. (2006), “E Kûkulu Kauhale O Limaloa: Kanaka Maoli Education through Visual Studies,” Paper presented at the Imaginative Education Research Symposium, Vancouver, BC. Available at: www.ierg.net/confs/ viewabstract.php?id=254&cf=3. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Deloria Jr., V. (1988 [1969]), Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto, Oklahoma City: University of Oklahoma Press.

Editors (2010), “Humanitarian Design vs. Design Imperialism: Debate Summary,” Design Observer/Change Observer, July 16. Available at: http://changeobserver.designobserver.com/feature/humanitariandesign-vs-design-imperialism-debate-summary/14498/. Accessed March 15, 2011.

Fabian, J. (1983), Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object, New York: Columbia University Press.

Fry, T. (1989), “A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality,” Design Issues , 6(1): 15–30.

Ghose, R. (1989), “Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia,” Design Issues , 6(1): 31–48.

Graeber, D. (2001), Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value, New York: Palgrave.

Gray, P. (2010), “Business Anthropology and the Culture of Product Managers,” AIPMM Product Management Library of Knowledge, August 8. Available at: www.aipmm.com/html/newsletter/archives/000437.php. Accessed May 6, 2012.

Hall, S. (1992), “The West and the Rest,” in S. Hall and B. Gielben (eds.), Formations of Modernity, Cambridge, UK: Polity Press and Open University, 276–320.

Halse, J. (2008), “Design Anthropology: Borderland Experiments with Participation, Performance and Situated Intervention,” PhD dissertation, IT University, Copenhagen.

Harrison, F. (2010), “Anthropology as an Agent of Transformation,” in F. Harrison (ed.), Decolonizing Anthropology: Moving Further toward an Anthropology for Liberation, third edition, Arlington, VA: Association of Black Anthropologists, American Anthropological Association, 1–14.

IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation (2008a), Design for Social Impact How-to Guide , New York, NY: IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation.

IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation (2008b), Design for Social Impact: Workbook, New York, NY: IDEO and Rockefeller Foundation.

Jepchumba (2009), “Saki Mafundikwa,” African Digital Art, September. Available at: www.africandigitalart.com/2009/09/saki-mafundikwa/. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Jostingmeier, B. and Boeddrich, H. J. (eds.) (2005), Cross-cultural Innovation: Results of the 8th European Conference on Creativity and Innovation, Wiesbaden, Germany: DUV.

Kohn, M. (2011), “Colonialism,” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall. Available at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/colonialism/. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Leach, J. (2011), “MSc Design Anthropology,” Department of Anthropology, University of Aberdeen. Available at: www.abdn.ac.uk/anthropology/postgrad/ MScdesignanthropology.php. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Leong, B. D., and Clark, H. (2003), “Culture-based Knowledge towards New Design Thinking and Practice—A Dialogue,” Design Issues , 19(3): 48–58.

Light, P. (2008), The Search for Social Entrepreneurship, Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.

Lodaya, A. (2002), “Reality Check,” Lodaya.Webs.Com. Available at: http:// lodaya.webs.com/paper\_rchk.htm. Accessed March 29, 2011.

Lodaya, A. (2003), “The Crisis of Traditional Craft in India,” Lodaya.Webs.Com . Available at: http://lodaya.webs.com/paper\_craft.htm. Accessed May 10, 2012.

Lodaya, A. (2006), “Conserving Culture as a Strategy for Sustainability,” Lodaya.Webs.Com. Available at: http://lodaya.webs.com/paper\_ccss.htm. Accessed May 10, 2012.

Lodaya, A. (2007), “Catching up; Letting Go,” Lodaya.Webs.Com. Available at: http://lodaya.webs.com/paper\_culg.htm. Accessed May 10, 2012.

Magda, R.M.R. (2004), Transmodernidad, Barcelona: Anthropos. Available at: http://transmoderntheory.blogspot.com/2008/12/globalization-as-transmodern-totality.html. Accessed October 15, 2010.

McCallum, K., and Papandrea, F. (2009), “Community Business: The Internet in Remote Australian Indigenous Communities,” New Media & Society, 11(7): 1230–1251.

Nussbaum, B. (2010a), “Is Humanitarian Design the New Imperialism?” Co.Design, July 7. Available at: www.fastcodesign.com/1661859/is-humanitariandesign-the-new-imperialism. Accessed March 27, 2011.

Nussbaum, B. (2010b), “Do-gooder Design and Imperialism, Round 3: Nussbaum Responds,” Co.Design, July 13. Available at: www.fastcodesign. com/1661894/do-gooder-design-and-imperialism-round-3-nussbaumresponds. Accessed March 27, 2011.

Nussbaum, B. (2010c), “Should Humanitarians Press on, If Locals Resist?” Co. Design, August 3. Available at: www.fastcodesign.com/1662021/nussbaumshould-humanitarians-press-on-if-locals-resist. Accessed March 27, 2011.

OECD and Eurostat (2005), Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collected and Interpreting Innovation Data , 3rd edition, Oslo: OECD.

Ortiz, F. (1995 [1945]), Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Otto, T. (2006), “Concerns, Norms and Social Action,” Folk, 46/47: 143–157.

Pilloton, E. (2010), “Are Humanitarian Designers Imperialists? Project H Responds,” Co.Design, July 12. Available at: www.fastcodesign.com/ 1661885/are-humanitarian-designers-imperialists-project-h-responds. Accessed March 27, 2011.

Ranjan, A., and Ranjan, M. P. (eds.) (2005), Handmade in India, New Delhi: National Institute of Design (NID), Ahmedabad, Council of Handicraft Development Corporations (COHANDS), New Delhi Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), New Delhi, and Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

Ranjan, M. P. (ed.) (2006),“Giving Back to Society: Towards a Post-mining Era,” IDSA Annual Conference , Austin, TX, September 17–20.

Ranjan, M. P. (2011), “Design for Good Governance: A Call for Change,” Design for India Blog, August 11. Available at: http://design-for-india.blogspot. com/2011/08/design-for-good-governance-call-for.html. Accessed November 14, 2011.

Restrepo, E., and Escobar, A. (2005), “Other Anthropologies and Anthropology Otherwise: Steps to a World Anthropologies Framework,” Critique of Anthropology , 25(2): 99–129.

Russell, L. (2001), Savage Imaginings, Melbourne: Australian Scholarly Publishing.

Said, E. (1978), Orientalism , New York: Vintage Books.

Samaras, K. (2005), “Indigenous Australians and the ‘Digital Divide,’ ” Libri, 55: 84–95.

Sennett, R. (2003), Respect: The Formation of Character in an Age of Inequality , New York: Norton.

Seyfang, G., and Smith, A. (2007), “Grassroots Innovation for Sustainable Development,” Environmental Politics , 16(4): 584–603.

Simon, H. (1969), The Sciences of the Artifi cial , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Smith, L. T. (1999), Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples , London: Zed Books and Dunedin: University of Otago Press.

Sperschnieder, W., Kjaersgaard, M., and Petersen, G. (2001), “Design Anthropology—When Opposites Attract,” First Danish HCI Research Symposium, PB-555, University of Aarhus, SIGCHI Denmark and Human Machine Interaction. Available at: www.daimi.au.dk/PB/555/PB-555. pdf. Accessed October 6, 2012.

Tax, S. (1975), “Action Anthropology,” Current Anthropology, 16(4) : 514–517.

Tunstall, E. (2006), “The Yin Yang of Ethnographic Praxis in Industry,” in Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference Proceedings, Portland, OR: National Association for the Practice of Anthropology and Berkeley: University of California Press, 125–137.

Tunstall, E. (2007), “Yin Yang of Design and Anthropology,” Unpublished paper presented at NEXT: AIGA 2007 Annual Conference , Denver, CO.

Tunstall, E. (2008a), “Design and Anthropological Theory: Trans-disciplinary Intersections in Ethical Design Praxis,” in Proceedings of the 96th Annual Conference of the College Arts Association [CD], Dallas, TX: College Arts Association.

Tunstall, E. (2008b) “Design Anthropology: What Does It Mean to Your Design Practice?” Adobe Design Center Think Tank, May 13. Available at: www. adobe.com/designcenter/thinktank/tt\_tunstall.html. Accessed August 5, 2008.

Tunstall, E. (2011), “Respectful Design: a Proposed Journey of Design Education” in A. Bennett and O. Vulpinari (eds.), ICOGRADA Education Manifesto 2011, Montreal: ICOGRADA.

Uddin, N. (2005), “Facts and Fantasy of Knowledge Retrospective of Ethnography for the Future of Anthropology,” Pakistan Journal of Social Science, 3(7) : 978–985.

Van Eeden, J. (2004), “The Colonial Gaze: Imperialism, Myths, and South African Popular Culture,” Design Issues , 20(2): 18–33.

Verran, H., and Christie, M. (2007), “Using/designing Digital Technologies of Representation in Aboriginal Australian Knowledge Practices,” Human Technology , 3(2): 214–227.

Wang, S. Z. (1989), “Chinese Modern Design: A Retrospective,” Design Issues , 6(1): 49–78.

Wolf, E. (1982), Europe and the People without History, Berkeley: University of California Press.
