> 来源：Staying with the Trouble Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Donna J. Haraway)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Staying with the Trouble Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Donna J. Haraway)\Staying with the Trouble Making Kin in the Chthulucene (Donna J. Haraway).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 5: Awash in Urine

1 Cyborgs might be considered to be “holoents” in the sense developed in chapter 3. 2 “Diethylstilbesterol,” Wikipedia. This Wikipedia article is a first stop with a useful bibliography, but is worse than worthless for tracking feminist and women’s health activist connections to des. See Bell, des Daughters, Embodied Knowledge, and the Transformation of Women’s Health Politics in the Late Twentieth Century. Barbara Seaman, who died in 2008, is one of my heroes in this story; her work was crucial to persuading the U.S. federal government to convene a task force on des. In 1975, she cofounded the National Women’s Health Network. For a bit of the history and tributes to Seaman, see Editors, “A Tribute to Barbara Seaman,” and Seaman, “Health Activism, American Feminist.” Jewish women have been central in the history of feminist women’s health activism. Another hero who recently died, Pat Cody, also worked effectively to change a personal tragedy caused by des into a global feminist health movement. See Rosen, “Pat Cody.” For innovative and standard-setting feminist science studies, see Oodshourn, Beyond the Natural Body.

First-generation users of des have increased incidence of and mortality rates from breast cancer. Second-generation offspring, “des daughters,” develop dangerous vaginal and breast cancers, as well as other problems like infertility and “abnormal pregnancy outcomes.” That means damaged or dead children. des is the only transplacental carcinogen known in our species. What a distinction! It is also a teratogen; see “abnormal pregnancy outcome.” des sons have nasty effects too. From Forney, “Diethylstilbesterol for Veterinary Use”: “The most-serious sideeffect of estrogen therapy [in dogs] is bone-marrow suppression and toxicity that may progress to a fatal aplastic-anemia . . . Side effects are more common in older animals.”

4 See Brooks, “Diethylstilbesterol”: “As the uses of des dwindled to a few veterinary uses, its manufacturer found it unprofitable to continue production and des went off the market in the late 1990s. Fortunately for the numerous incontinent female dogs hoping to lead indoor lives, the human carcinogenicity issues have not crossed over into the canine health arena. The low doses and infrequent dosing schedule has [sic] positioned des as a medication of unparalleled safety and convenience in the treatment of canine incontinence. Compounding pharmacies now make this medication readily available to patients who need it on a prescription basis.” An important player in companion animal consumer marketing, Foster and Smith, “Diethylstilbesterol,” tells us that prolonged use in pets can cause ovarian cancer.

5 Raun and Preston, “History of Diethylstilbestrol Use in Cattle.”

6 Popular sites on estrogens in and for women include “Estrogen,” Healthy Women. org, and “Estrogen,” Midlife-Passages.com. Premarin® is a mix of conjugated estrogens branded with a registered trademark. These equine estrogens are chemically different from those made in the human body; i.e., they are not bioidentical, but they are bioactive across species. Ethinyl estradiol is the artificial estrogen commonly found in contemporary birth control pills and, like des, is manufactured in the laboratory. Nomenclatures for hormones around terms like natural, synthetic, biomimetic, bioidentical, and artificial can be confusing, biologically and politically. For example, soy-derived estrogens often are called natural, but not because they are chemically identical to naturally occurring human estrogens. “Natural” is about branded biovalue in many contested senses. Cenestin is a conjugated estrogen marketed by Duramed Pharmaceuticals. Made from plant sources, Cenestin is called “natural,” but it is a conjugated mix that is chemically a copy of Premarin, so neither is bioidentical to human estrogens. Because it is derived from horses, Premarin gets called synthetic, although it is heavily processed but not synthesized in the laboratory. See Petras, “Making Sense of hrt.” Substituting a plant source for horse urine, Cenestin is a the kind of work-around that becomes cost effective when the biopolitical/bioethical cost of a technoscientific product gets too high in a particular naturalcultural ecology. Duramed calls its conjugated estrogens “synthetic” and an “advanced form of Premarin,” emphasizing that “Cenestin does not contain any hormone synthesized by the horse.” So Cenestin is at once natural, synthetic, mimetic, and advanced, while Premarin’s relation to horses forbids the label natural. Keeping corporate lawyers busy, the patenting fur has flown thickly over the naming rights for these drugs.

7 Hormone Health Network, “Emminen.” The first hormonal treatment for symptoms of human menopause in the United States, in 1929, was with a derivative of calf amniotic fluid. Emmenin, from Canadian pregnant women’s urine, was first marketed in the United States in 1933. In 1939 des was marketed as a more potent estrogen than Emmenin. An obvious cyborg cocktail, the mix of historically situated organic and technological species, both human and not-human, could hardly be missed.

8 Women’s Health Initiative, “Risks and Benefits of Estrogen Plus Progestin in Healthy Postmenopausal Women”; Vance, “Premarin.” See also Wilks, “The Comparative Potencies of Birth Control and Menopausal Hormone Drug Use.”

9 North American Equine Ranching Information Council, “About the Equine Ranching Industry.”

10 North American Equine Ranching Information Council, “Equine Veterinarians’ Consensus Report on the Care of Horses on pmu Ranches.”

11 HorseAid, “What Are the Living Conditions of the Mares?”

12 “Premarin Controversy,” Wikipedia; Horse Fund, “Fact Sheet”; HorseAid website; Hall, “The Bright Side of pmu.”

13 HorseAid Report, “PREgnant MARes’ urINe, Curse or Cure?”

14 Horse Fund, “Fact Sheet.” The horsefund.org fact sheet paints a very different picture than the naeric website. HorseAid has been more careful in its descriptions and dates than the International Fund for Horses, which continued to publish as if they were current, as late as 2011, conditions originally described in the 1980s and 1990s, but also printed an interesting and damning timeline on Premarin and its checkered corporate and medical history on http://www.horsefund.org/premarin -timeline.php, online in November 2011, but unavailable in August 2015. For data on Premarin sales and pmu farm numbers from 1965 to 2010, see Allin, “Wyeth Wins, Horses Lose.” In 2010 Allin was a research analyst with the International Fund for Horses. Pfizer will increase pmu collection in 2016–17.

15 Working in Manitoba for about nine years, Equine Angels Rescue Sanctuary narrated a story from October 2011 about helping pmu farmers get out of the breeding business. The plan attended to the needs of farmers, foals, mares, and stallions. The note on the website on February 3, 2015, updated progress on the project. See Weller, Equine Angels. There were several other pmu horse rescue sites active in 2011. The last time I checked the unfinished story was August 13, 2015; see Equine Advocates, “pmu Industry.” Reflecting the sharp decline in farm numbers since 2002, rescue operations now attend more to out-of-work pmu horses than to overproduced foals, but pregnant mare’s urine is still produced and still used in Premarin-containing products.
