> 来源：Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not _ Global Economic -- Parthasarathi, Prasannan -- 1, 2011 -- Cambridge University Press (Virtual Pu
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not _ Global Economic -- Parthasarathi, Prasannan -- 1, 2011 -- Cambridge University Press (Virtual Pu\Why Europe Grew Rich and Asia Did Not _ Global Economic -- Parthasarathi, Prasannan -- 1, 2011 -- Cambridge University Press (Virtual Pu.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 9 Conclusion

The industrialization of Britain was a slow and protracted process, but by the early decades of the nineteenth century it was evident that the path of economic development in Western Europe had diverged from that of the Indian subcontinent. With the rise of the British cotton industry the major textile-exporting centers in the world migrated from India to Europe. The growing use of coal and steam revolutionized sources of power as well as transport and dramatically expanded the scale of production and output in the British Isles. Britain had given birth to a new industrial economy.

Why did these changes emerge in Europe and not the advanced regions of Asia? This work has given a new answer to this very old question. In a nutshell, it has argued that historians must move away from the search for what made Europe economically, socially or culturally different and instead focus on the social needs, economic pressures and political responses that produced different paths of change in the eighteenth century. The British path was a coming together of global competitive pressures, ecological shortfalls and a mercantile state. No other advanced region faced these pressures and combined them with a state that had such capacities to forge a revolutionary response. While the highly commercialized regions of the Indian subcontinent had their own sources of political and economic dynamism, and there was undoubtedly significant technological change taking place, the pressures were not such that radical transformations were needed or risky paths had to be pursued.

The novelty of this answer to the puzzle of European divergence rests in part on new empirical material. The uniqueness of Europe's science and technology has been widely accepted but little examined. The empirical material on India brought together here presents a very different picture for the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Similarly, the many cases of successful technology transfer from Western Europe to India in the early nineteenth century are evidence of greater comparability in skill and knowledge between these two regions than has been previously appreciated. And a re-examination of data on silver flows and minting in the Mughal Empire complements voluminous research on the export of cotton textiles from Gujarat, Bengal and southeastern India and provides information on the commodity that balanced this outflow of cloth. Finally, with respect to eighteenth-century Britain, the papers of the early cotton masters, as well as other writings connected to the cotton manufacture, suggest that the drive to supplant Indian goods loomed large in the minds and activities of British textile men. These same materials point to the importance of the protection of trade for British economic life.

The argument given here also rests on a rethinking of the categories which have been used to study the problem of divergence. In the last quarter century, historians have engaged in a profound interrogation of the frameworks and concepts with which they comprehend and write about the past. Basic categories themselves have been historicized, and therefore denaturalized, and made the subject of historical investigation. In part, this is a product of the cultural turn in which historians inspired by Michel Foucault and others have studied the discourses and practices that establish regimes of truth. Such questioning of historical categories happened on a broader front, however, and was not inspired only by the cultural turn but emerged in the writing of social history as well. Works such as Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger's Invention of Tradition simultaneously historicized the idea of tradition, showing it to be often a nineteenthcentury product, and inverted the longstanding arrow of historical change from tradition to modernity.

In this work, three elements that appear in much writing on economic divergence between Europe and Asia have been systematically criticized and rejected. These are Orientalist constructions of Asia, in particular India, a focus on the market as the driver of economic change, and historical anachronisms in the framing of the question. While Orientalist thinking on the East has earlier antecedents, it, along with the market and anachronistic ways of thinking about divergence, became entrenched in the nineteenth century and continues to shape the contours of the discussion on divergence to this day.

As we have seen, Orientalist writings saw the society and economy of India as backward and inferior to that of Europe. François Bernier's vision of the East as the land of despots was an early and influential strand. A second conceived of economic and commercial life, along with reason and science, as underdeveloped in India. Much of this was captured in a vision of India as lacking in history and therefore unchanging for centuries, if not millennia. James Mill, for instance, wrote in The History of British India, “From the scattered hints contained in the writings of the Greeks, the conclusion has been drawn, that the Hindus, at the time of Alexander's invasion, were in a state of manners, society, and knowledge, exactly the same with that in which they were discovered by the nations of modern Europe.” 1

The assumption that India had no history led to the projection of the colonial Indian society of the nineteenth century into earlier periods. Most famously, Marx elevated the self-sufficient village, which emerged in the 1820s and 1830s, into a timeless feature of the Indian countryside. The agglomeration “in small centres by the domestic union of agricultural and manufacturing pursuits . . . had brought about, since the remotest times, a social system of particular features – the so-called village system, which gave to each of these small unions their independent organisation and distinct life,” Marx wrote. 2 He supported his understanding of India with reference to an early nineteenth-century report of the British House of Commons, but in Marx's mind, the Indian present stood for the Indian past. Marx is not alone in projecting the static and stagnant economy of colonial India into earlier historical epochs and many have done this both consciously and unconsciously.

For many, the backward and abysmal economic conditions of the nineteenth century may make it difficult to imagine a different kind of India in the not so distant past. As shown in this work, however, the period between 1600 and 1800 was a time of great economic and political dynamism in the advanced regions of the Indian subcontinent. Vibrant production of cotton textiles for export led to sizable inflows of silver, gold, copper and cowries which fueled a commercial revolution. Political competition led to state centralization and advances in science and technology, especially in areas that could be of benefit to the state such as armaments production.

From the second decade of the nineteenth century there was a sustained economic regression in Bengal, South India, Gujarat and other regions of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century dynamism. An early sign of decline was the falling demand for Indian cotton cloth in markets around the world as Indian manufacturers were displaced by Lancashire. From the 1820s, British machine-spun yarn began to be found in the markets of Bengal, Bombay and Madras and local hand spinners started to be undercut. The fall in Indian cloth exports led to a fall in imports of silver into the subcontinent, which since the sixteenth century had turned the wheels of commerce. The contraction in international trade, in turn, led to a decline in the internal trade of the advanced regions of the subcontinent and culminated in a dramatic de-commercialization from the 1820s, and perhaps even slightly earlier.

Trade was not all that declined, however. The dismantling of the Indian state system led to a loss of demand for a variety of goods, particularly armaments, which had been a source of technical and manufacturing dynamism in the eighteenth century. The rise of the British colonial order also translated into a loss of patronage for institutions that produced and diffused knowledge. Education suffered. Libraries were looted, burned in battle or dismantled. Scientific and technical inquiries were not supported. As a consequence, there was a profound loss of knowledge and skills in the first several decades of the nineteenth century and an enormous technical gap opened between the subcontinent and Western Europe. The Indian society and economy that emerged in the nineteenth century was, therefore, radically different from what had preceded it and should not be projected into the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Similarly, the critique of state intervention in the economy, which became an increasingly important principle of economic thinking from the late eighteenth century and entered into the heart of British economic life in the nineteenth, should not inform interpretations of economic change in earlier periods. As shown in this book, the ascendance of Smithian political economy in early nineteenth-century Britain led to a profound reinterpretation of economic change in the eighteenth century. The understanding of innovation in the British cotton industry shifted from competition with India and state protection to the forces of the market and supply and demand. When the first authoritative histories of the British cotton industry were written in the early decades of the nineteenth century, they were influenced by the market ideas of the day. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, however, there was little debate that the state could promote economically desirable outcomes. And there is little doubt that states from Western Europe to Japan were intimately involved in shaping paths of economic development. The image of the optimal and efficient, self-regulating market economy had little purchase before the publication and diffusion of the Wealth of Nations.

From the late seventeenth century the British state restricted imports of Indian cotton cloth, which gave an impetus to local cloth printing and then to local cotton cloth manufacturing, which were given a monopoly over the British market. Over the course of the eighteenth century the British state steadily increased tariffs on iron imports from Sweden and Russia, which gave local ironmasters a guarantee of high prices for their goods as they experimented with coal and new techniques of smelting. And British state protection for trade, whether through the Navigation Acts which helped to create British dominance in the Atlantic or through the protection of coastal convoys of coal, aided British economic growth and expansion. The British state was not alone in its activism. From the mid-seventeenth century, the Japanese state crafted policies to preserve and revive forested areas, which stabilized and restored the forest ecology. In China, the Qing granary system was critical for the redistribution of food from surplus to deficit areas of the empire. In the Indian subcontinent, rulers patronized institutions for the development of scientific and technical knowledge and kept agricultural production at a high pitch with advances to cultivators or taccavi.

State interventionist policies continued in the nineteenth century. In Britain itself, protectionism would remain in force till the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. In France, Belgium and Germany, a broad range of policies were instituted to promote manufacturing. The deleterious impact of laissez-faire, in which such state support is not extended to the development of the economy, is evident from British India where technology transfer was impeded, the establishment of new industrial methods of manufacturing was aborted, and technical skills and knowledge atrophied or disappeared. In the Indian case, British officials justified their hands-off approach with an appeal to the authority of Adam Smith, but the needs of British manufacturing loomed large in the making of such policies. Therefore, an intellectual agenda came to be set in the nineteenth century which favored a free operation of the market, and gave shape to much historical interpretation, even though many practical men continued to favor an activist state.

Finally, the nineteenth century bequeathed an anachronistic framework to the study of divergence. Efforts to identify what Europe had and Asia did not, whether capitalism, reason or coal, reduced economic change in the eighteenth century to either industrialization or its failure. It projected modern industry, which became the universally desired goal of economic development from the nineteenth century, into earlier periods. As argued in this book, an industrial economy was not premeditated but emerged from a configuration of political, economic and ecological forces and pressures in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Britain. The British response to these forces and pressures, both technological and institutional, forged the nineteenth-century industrial order. The advanced areas of Asia were themselves undergoing profound economic and technological change in these centuries. The paths they followed were radically different, however, because of the radically different political, economic and social contexts.

The argument of this book rests on an analysis of the systematic differences in economic and political structures across the advanced regions of Europe and Asia. While some structural elements analyzed here have figured in the debate on divergence, most importantly the ecological, others have been less discussed, such as the ways in which the global trade in textiles and the relation between the state and economy created varied contexts and possibilities for change. Many structural differences considered critical in previous works, including the efficiency of markets, scientific and technological dynamism, demographic patterns, state systems and so forth, have been given little weight because, as this book argues, the empirical evidence suggests that in these areas the advanced regions of Europe and India were far more similar than previously thought.

The argument of this work does not rest only on an analysis of structure, however, for it is not structures that shape history but the actions of individuals. While structures differed across the advanced regions of Europe and Asia and provided both different pressures and different possibilities, it was the preferences, choices and actions of individuals operating within these structures that gave rise to different paths of historical development. These actions included inventing new techniques of production, state officials defining and implementing policy, and associations of individuals agitating for political support.

The attention given to agency has two important implications, the first for our understanding of economic life and the second for the study of divergence. With respect to divergence, the attention to agency leads to the comparison of historical processes or paths of change. The objects of comparison are dynamic entities. If only structures are compared, the result is exercises in comparative statics as it is presumed that a particular structure will lead to given outcomes. And an exceptional structure will give way to exceptional outcomes. Sufficient consideration is not paid to the process by which that outcome is reached. It leads to history writing in which there is a beginning and an end, but no middle. What this book has sought to do is to see divergence as the outcome of processes of historical change and to supply the missing middle.

The attention given to agency makes the economy a human creation. A focus on structures constructs the economy as lying beyond human intervention and subject to its own imperatives and iron laws, whose inevitability and inviolability are reinforced by the naturalism of economics, whether derived from Adam Smith's grounding of economic life in man's propensities or from neoclassical assumptions about human behavior. The framework of this book sees the paths of economic development in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as very much the product of human creativity and choice, not the product of timeless laws.

## Notes to the text
