> 来源：Understanding computers and cognition a new foundation for design (Winograd, Terry, Flores, Fernando)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Understanding computers and cognition a new foundation for design (Winograd, Terry, Flores, Fernando)\Understanding computers and cognition a new foundation for design (Winograd, Terry, Flores, Fernando).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# Chapter 1

# Introduction

Computers are everywhere. The versatile silicon chip has found a place in our homes, our schools, our work, and our leisure. We must cope with a flood of new devices, bringing with them both benefits and dangers. Popular books and magazines proclaim that we are witnessing a 'computer revolution,' entering a 'micro-millennium' in which computers will completely transform our lives.

We search for images that can help us anticipate computer impacts and direct further development. Are computers merely giant adding machines or are they electronic brains? Can they only do 'programmed' rote tasks or can we expect them to learn and create? The popular discourse about these questions draws heavily on the analogy between computation and human thought:

While many areas of human endeavor have currently seemed to flounder—such as understanding and dealing with economic systems or correcting social injustices—research and technical developments in the scientific field of artificial intelligence have exploded. ... As a result, artificial-intelligence researchers are developing computers that can listen to spoken sentences and grasp their meaning; that can read news stories and write succinct, accurate, grammatical summaries; that employ robots, who never get bored, to work on assembly lines; that assemble data about a sick person-and suggest a diagnosis.— Stockton, "Creating computers to think like humans" (1980), p. 41

In five or six years—by 1988 or thereabouts-portable, quasihuman brains, made of silicon or gallium arsenide, will be commonplace.' They will be an intelligent electronic race, working as partners with the human race. We will carry these small creatures around with us everywhere. Just pick them up, tuck them under your arm, and go off to attend to your business. They will be Artoo-Deetoos without wheels: brilliant, but nice personalities, never sarcastic, always giving you a straight answer—little electronic friends that can solve all your problems.—Jastrow, "The thinking computer" (1982), p.107.

We are about to embark on a massive programme to develop highly intelligent machines, a process by which we will lead computers by the hand until they reach our own intellectual level, after which they will proceed to surpass us.... But what will we do with the Ultra-Intelligent Machines when they arrive? Clearly, the first thing would be to put them to work on some of the numerous problems facing society. These could be economic, medical or educational matters, and also, perhaps, strategic modelling to forecast trends and produce early warnings of difficulties or crises. . .. It is unlikely that there will be any serious objections to this apart from those of an emotional or doctrinaire nature. - Evans, The Micro Millennium (1979), pp. 195-196, 229.

But focussing on the image of 'computer as brain' can lead us away from the important questions. The concern with giving computers humanlike (or god-like) intelligence rests on a more fundamental discourse about the nature of technology and of human thinking, language, and being. This discourse has unfolded within a tradition—a way of understanding—that is deeply rooted in modern technological society.

In examining this tradition, we came to realize that although it provides a fertile background for developing new technology, it does not support an adequate understanding of what computer devices do in a context of human practice. We were led to a broad critique of what has been said about computers, and what has been done in disciplines such as linguistics, psychology, and management science. We developed a new orientation that provides an alternative basis for understanding computer technology.

## 1.1 The question of design

In order to understand the phenomena surrounding a new technology, we must open the question of design—the interaction between understanding and creation. In speaking here of design, we are not restricting our concern to the methodology of conscious design. We address the broader question of how a society engenders inventions whose existence in turn alters that society. We need to establish a theoretical basis for looking at what the devices do, not just how they operate.

In order to develop such a theoretical basis we must step back and examine the implicit understanding of design that guides technological development within our existing tradition of thought. Only by unconcealing that tradition and making explicit its assumptions can we open ourselves to alternatives and to the new design possibilities that flow from them. The remainder of this introduction provides a guide to how we have undertaken that task in this book.

We can illustrate the kind of questioning we have in mind by seriously asking "What is a word processor?" The first thing to recognize is that different answers grow from the concerns of different individuals. For the manager of a factory that builds word processors, they are assemblies of electronic and mechanical devices, to be constructed, tested, and shipped. For the person who programs the word processor, it is a particular collection of software, dealing with the input, storage, and output of bytes of information. It operates through some kind of interface to a user who generates and modifies that information.

These are both perfectly valid answers, arising in particular domains to which the theories of computation and electronics are relevant. If we want to understand a breakdown of the hardware or software, we operate in their terms and turn to them for predictions. But these answers do not deal with what a word processor does—with the fact that it is a medium for the creation and modification of linguistic structures that play a role in human communication. For the purchaser of a word processor, this is the relevant domain. The word processor exists as a collection of hardware or programs only when it breaks down.1 In its use, one is concerned with the actions of creating and modifying documents and producing physical presentations of them on a screen or printed page. The relevant domain is not a computational one, but one that emerged long ago with the first writing instruments. It brings with it concerns of visual presentationissues of layout, type fonts, and integration of text with illustrations. Many current computer products are designed with a primary concern for this domain. They deal at length with formats and typography, focussing on the document as the thing being produced.

But still with this, we have not reached a full understanding of the word processor. We cannot take the activity of writing as an independent phenomenon. Writing is an instrument—a tool we use in our interactions with other people. The computer, like any other medium, must be understood in the context of communication and the larger network of equipment and practices in which it is situated. A person who sits down at a word processor is not just creating a document, but is writing a letter or a memo or a book. There is a complex social network in which these activities make sense. It includes institutions (such as post offices and publishing companies), equipment (including word processors and computer networks, but also all of the older technologies with which they coexist), practices (such as buying books and reading the daily mail), and conventions (such as the legal status of written documents).

The significance of a new invention lies in how it fits into and changes this network. Many innovations are minor-they simply improve some aspect of the network without altering its structure. The automatic transmission made automobiles easier to use, but did not change their role. Other inventions, such as the computer, are radical innovations that cannot be understood in terms of the previously existing network. The printing press, the automobile, and television are all examples of radical innovations that opened up whole new domains of possibilities for the network of human interactions. Just as the automobile had impacts on our society far beyond speeding up what had been done with horses, the use of computers will lead to changes far beyond those of a fancy typewriter. The nature of publishing, the structure of communication within organizations, and the social organization of knowledge will all be altered, as they were with the emergence of other technologies for language, such as the printing press.

One might think that the questioning can stop at this point. It is clear (and has been widely recognized) that one cannot understand a technology without having a functional understanding of how it is used. Furthermore, that understanding must incorporate a holistic view of the network of technologies and activities into which it fits, rather than treating the technological devices in isolation. But this is still not enough. We can say that the word processor must be understood by virtue of the role it plays in communication, the distribution of information, and the accumulation of knowledge. But in doing so we take for granted the use of words like 'communication,' 'information,' and 'knowledge,' which themselves require closer examination. In this examination, we find ourselves being drawn into inquiries about basic human phenomena that have been called things like 'intelligence,' 'language,' and 'rationality.'

As the use of a new technology changes human practices, our ways of speaking about that technology change our language and our understanding. This new way of speaking in turn creates changes in the world we construct. As an example of how new language creates new possibilities for action, consider Freud's introduction of terms such as 'ego,' 'subconscious,' and 'repression.' At one level we might say that he recognized and labelled phenomena that had always existed. But the innovation in his language had a major impact on human society, in everything from the way we treat deviants (such as prisoners and the mentally il to the way we teach our children.

Looking at computers we find the same process at work. The development of the technology has led to new uses of terms such as 'information,' 'input,' 'output,' 'language,' and 'communication,' while work in areas such as artificial intelligence is bringing new meanings to words like 'intelligence,' 'decision,' and 'knowledge.' The technical jargon gives shape to our commonsense understanding in a way that changes our lives.

In order to become aware of the effects that computers have on society we must reveal the implicit understanding of human language, thought, and work that serves as a background for developments in computer technology. In this endeavor we are doubly concerned with language. First, we are studying a technology that operates in a domain of language. The computer is a device for creating, manipulating, and transmitting symbolic (hence linguistic) objects. Second, in looking at the impact of the computer, we find ourselves thrown back into questions of language——how practice shapes our language and language in turn generates the space of possibilities for action.

This book, then, is permeated by a concern for language. Much of our theory is a theory of language, and our understanding of the computer centers on the role it will play in mediating and facilitating linguistic action as the essential human activity. In asking what computers can do, we are drawn into asking what people do with them, and in the end into addressing the fundamental question of what it means to be human.

## 1.2 The role of tradition

One cannot approach questions like those raised in the previous section from a neutral or objective standpoint. Every questioning grows out of a tradition—a pre-understanding that opens the space of possible answers. We use the word 'tradition' here in a broad sense, without the connotation that it belongs to a cohesive social or cultural group, or that it consists of particular customs or practices. It is a more pervasive, fundamental phenomenon that might be called a 'way of being.' In trying to understand a tradition, the first thing we must become aware of is how it is concealed by its obviousness. It is not a set of rules or sayings, or something we will find catalogued in an encyclopedia. It is a way of understanding, a background, within which we interpret and act. We use the word 'tradition' because it emphasizes the historicity of our ways of thinking-—the fact that we always exist within a pre-understanding determined by the history of our interactions with others who share the tradition.

When we encounter people who live in a substantially different tradition, we are struck by the impression that they have a strange and apparently arbitrary 'world view.' It takes a careful self-awareness to turn the same gaze on our own lives and 'unconceal' our own tradition—to bring into conscious observation that which invisibly gives shape to our thought.

In examining how people have thought about and talked about computers, we become aware of the pervasive effect of a powerful tradition that emphasizes 'information,' 'representation,' and 'decision making.' This tradition has been the basis for a great deal of technological progress and it has also led to many of the problems created by the use of computers. Even in discussions of what computers can and cannot do, the questions that are posed reflect a particular blindness about the nature of human thought and language-a blindness that can lead to a broad misunderstanding of the role that will be played by computers.

We have labelled this tradition the 'rationalistic tradition' because of its emphasis on particular styles of consciously rationalized thought and action. In calling it 'rationalistic' we are not equating it with 'rational.' We are not interested in a defense of irrationality or a mystic appeal to nonrational intuition. The rationalistic tradition is distinguished by its narrow focus on certain aspects of rationality, which (as we will show throughout the book) often leads to attitudes and activities that are not rational when viewed in a broader perspective. Our commitment is to developing a new ground for rationality—one that is as rigorous as the rationalistic tradition in its aspirations but that does not share the presuppositions behind it.

The task we have undertaken in this book is to challenge the rationalistic tradition, introducing an alternative orientation that can lead to asking new questions. In developing this new orientation, we were led to a critique of the current mythology of artificial intelligence and its related cognitive theories, drawing conclusions that contradict the naive optimism apparent in the quotations at the beginning of the chapter. Our ultimate goal, however, is not a debunking but a redirection. The alternative we pose is not a position in a debate about whether or not computers will be intelligent, but an attempt to create a new understanding of how to design computer tools suited to human use and human purposes.

## 1.3 Our path

Our intention is to provide an opportunity for the reader to develop a new orientation. No book can embody the result of such a process, but through entering a dialog with the reader we can help make it possible. We have attempted to do this in three steps. First we present some previous work that challenges the theoretical assumptions of the rationalistic tradition, calling into question much of what is normally taken for granted in our tradition. Next we carefully examine, from the orientation developed in the first part, the phenomena that have emerged in the practice of computer olyFialy w  alaiv in  h of computer-based tools.

Part I of the book (Chapters 1-6) describes the rationalistic tradition and presents three distinct bodies of work, each of which stands in contrast to that tradition and each of which has deeply influenced our own understanding. We do not attempt to provide a philosophical exposition and critique in which arguments for and against each position are enumerated and weighed. We find it more fruitful to present the central points, listening for their relevance to our own concerns. Our discourse is theoretical in that it deals with fundamental questions, but it is not directed towards postulating formal theories that can be systematically used to make predictions. As will become clear, one of the most prominent illusions of the rationalistic tradition is the belief that knowledge consists of explicit theories of that sort.

Chapter 2 describes the rationalistic tradition in some detail, showing how it serves as a basis for our culture's commonsense understanding of language, thought, and rationality. Our goal is to reveal biases and assumptions that are concealed by their embodiment in the background of our language.

Chapter 3 deals with a tradition that includes hermeneutics (the study of interpretation) and phenomenology (the philosophical examination of the foundations of experience and action). This tradition has emerged from humanistic studies, and is concerned with the relation of the individual to the context—especially the social context—in which he or she lives. It emphasizes those areas of human experience where individual interpretation and intuitive understanding (as opposed to logical deduction and conscious reflection) play a central role. Its exponents challenge the belief that a formal analytical understanding of these phenomena is possible at all.

We concentrate on the work of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Martin Heidegger. Many other philosophers have explored related ideas, including phenomenologists such as Husserl, Ricoeur, and Merleau-Ponty, existentialists such as Sartre, pragmatists such as Mead and Dewey, current political philosophers such as Habermas and Apel, and even some with a more analytic background, such as Wittgenstein. We have selected Heidegger and Gadamer, partly because of the role their writings played in our own learning, and partly because of their intrinsic importance within the tradition they represent. Heidegger stands out as the modern philosopher who has done the most thorough, penetrating, and radical analysis of everyday experience. His ideas lie at the root of much of what other philosophers have said, and at the root of our own orientation. Gadamer has been most articulate in applying this orientation to the problem of language, a problem that we see as central. Since it was not our intention to produce a work of philosophical scholarship, we do not attempt to draw connections between the discourse developed by these two philosophers and the many others that preceded and followed them. Our aim is to bring out the relevant distinctions in the clearest possible way, by focussing on their central insights.

Chapter 4 presents the work of Humberto R. Maturana, a Chilean neurobiologist most widely known for his work on the neurophysiology of vision. His background is that of a biologist, not a philosopher, and he deals first and foremost with the nature of biological organisms as mechanistic structure-determined systems. His work was critical in the development of our understanding of cognition and of our perspective on the rationalistic tradition.

Writers like Heidegger challenge the dominant view of mind, declaring that cognition is not based on the systematic manipulation of representations. This perspective has been the basis for several critiques of artificial intelligence² that initially have a kind of mystical feel to those within the scientific community. In questioning the common understanding of the relationship among perception, representation, and thought, these accounts seem at first sight to deny the physical basis of human action. Maturana provides two useful insights that let us escape from this limited pre-understanding: the role of the observer in creating phenomenal domains; and the concept of structural coupling, which allows us to understand behavior that is mechanically generated but not programmed. As a biologist, Maturana sets out a conceptual framework in which phenomena of interpretation arise as a necessary consequence of the structure of biological beings. At the same time, he compels us to acquire a new understanding of the way we talk about physical nature and to apply this understanding to ourselves.

As we pointed out earlier, questions concerning cognition are intertwined with questions about the nature of language. Chapter 5 begins by showing how the insights of hermeneutics are relevant to the issues that have traditionally been addressed by linguists and analytic philosophers of language. It emphasizes the role of the listener in the active generation of meaning, showing how the idealization of 'literal meaning' breaks down in looking at ordinary language. We then introduce speech act theory, as developed by Austin and Searle and later adapted by social philosophers such as Habermas. Although this work grew out of the analytic school of philosophy, its view of language as speech acts challenges the rationalistic tradition by suggesting that language, and therefore thought, is ultimately based on social interaction. Speech act theory is a starting point for an understanding of language as an act of social creation. In the last part of the chapter we present our own synthesis of speech act theory and the hermeneutic understanding of language developed in Chapter 3. This synthesis is central to our interpretation of computer technology in the second part of the book. It leads us to the conclusion that we create our world through language, an observation that has important consequences for design.

Chapter 6, which acts as a transition to the remainder of the book, draws out and summarizes some common points from the preceding three chapters. The rejection of cognition as the manipulation of knowledge of an objective world, the primacy of action and its central role in language, and the impossibility of completely articulating background assumptions all play a major role in the critique of current computer technology presented in Part II and in the new design orientation elaborated in Part III.

Part II (Chapters 7-10) addresses concrete questions about what computers do. Our goal is to understand and reinterpret what is currently being done and to anticipate future developments.

Chapter 7 describes what people do when they program computers. It focusses on the relationship between the intentions of programmers and the behavior of devices that run the programs they create. Programming is a process of creating symbolic representations that are to be interpreted at some level within a hierarchy of constructs of varying degrees of abstractness. The interactions between levels of representation can be complex, since each is implemented in terms of the lower ones. This description lays the groundwork for the discussion of computer intelligence in the following chapters.

Chapter 8 examines the computational techniques that have been proposed as a basis for artificial intelligence. Drawing on the ideas outlined in Part I, we argue-contrary to widespread current belief-that one cannot construct machines that either exhibit or successfully model intelligent behavior. We begin by asking why mind-like properties are attributed to computers but not to other types of machines that can equally be said to provide or process information. We continue with a more thorough exposition of work in artificial intelligence and an analysis of its limitations. Many of the difficulties with current research derive from a fundamental orientation that equates intelligence with rationalistic problem solving based on heuristic procedures.

Chapter 9 takes up the theme of the preceding chapter within the context of computer programs that process natural language. We look at why the many programs developed during the 1970s do not approach the human ability to interpret meaning. In spite of a wide variety of ingenious techniques for making analysis and recognition more flexible, the scope of comprehension remains severely limited. There may be practical applications for computer processing of natural-language-like formalisms and for limited processing of natural language, but computers will remain incapable of using language in the way human beings do, both in interpretation and in the generation of commitment that is central to language.

Chapter 10 takes a critical look at some major current research directions in areas such as knowledge engineering, expert systems, and the so-called 'fifth generation' computers. It describes the overall shift from the general goal of creating programs that can understand language and thought to that of designing software for specialized task domains, and evaluates the projections being made for the coming years.

Part III (Chapters 11 and 12) presents an alternative orientation to design, based on the theoretical background we have developed. The relevant questions are not those comparing computers to people, but those opening up a potential for computers that play a meaningful role in human life and work. Once we move away from the blindness generated by the old questions, we can take a broader perspective on what computers can do.

Chapter 11 addresses the task of designing computer tools for use in organizational contexts. We focus on the activity of people called 'managers,' but the same concerns arise in all situations involving social interaction and collaborative effort. Drawing on Heidegger's discussion of 'thrownness' and 'breakdown,' we conclude that models of rationalistic problem solving do not reflect how actions are really determined, and that programs based on such models are unlikely to prove successful. Nevertheless, there is a role for computer technology in support of managers and as aids in coping with the complex conversational structures generated within an organization. Much of the work that managers do is concerned with initiating, monitoring, and above all coordinating the networks of speech acts that constitute social action.

Chapter 12 returns to the fundamental questions of design and looks at possibilities for computer technology opened up by the understanding developed in the preceding chapters. After briefly reviewing the relevant theoretical ideas outlined earlier, we examine some of the phenomena to which design must address itself, illustrating our approach with a concrete example. We also consider design in relation to systematic domains of human activity, where the objects of concern are formal structures and the rules for manipulating them. The challenge posed here for design is not simply to create tools that accurately reflect existing domains, but to provide for the creation of new domains. Design serves simultaneously to bring forth and to transform the objects, relations, and regularities of the world of our concerns.

## 1.3. OUR PATH

In one sense, then, this is a book about computers. But it reaches beyond the specific issues of what computers can do. Our larger goal is to clarify the background of understanding in which the discourse about computers and technology takes place, and to grasp its broader implications. Ultimately we are seeking a better understanding of what it means to be human. In this quest, progress is not made by finding the 'right answers,' but by asking meaningful questions-ones that evoke an openness to new ways of being. We invite the readers to create with us an openness that can alter our collective vision of how computer technology will develop in the coming decades.

# The rationalistic tradition

Current thinking about computers and their impact on society has been shaped by a rationalistic tradition that needs to be re-examined and challenged as a source of understanding. As a first step we will characterize the tradition of rationalism and logical empiricism that can be traced back at least to Plato. This tradition has been the mainspring of Western science and technology, and has demonstrated its effectiveness most clearly in the 'hard sciences'—those that explain the operation of deterministic mechanisms whose principles can be captured in formal systems. The tradition finds its highest expression in mathematics and logic, and has greatly influenced the development of linguistics and cognitive psychology.

We will make no attempt to provide a full historical account of this tradition, or to situate it on some kind of intellectual map. Instead, we have chosen to concentrate on understanding its effects on current discourse and practice, especially in relation to the development and impact of computers. The purpose of this chapter is to outline its major points and illustrate their embodiment in current theories of language, mind, and action.

## 2.1 The rationalistic orientation

We can begin to reveal the rationalistic tradition by considering the question "What do you do when faced with some problem whose solution you care about?" The rationalistic orientation can be depicted in a series of steps:

Characterize the situation in terms of identifiable objects with welldefined properties.

2Find general rules that apply to situations in terms of those objects and properties.

3. Apply the rules logically to the situation of concern, drawing conclusions about what should be done.

There are obvious questions about how we set situations into correspondence with systematic 'representations' of objects and properties, and with how we can come to know general rules. In much of the rationalistic tradition, however, these are deferred in favor of emphasizing the formulation of systematic rules that can be used to draw logical conclusions. Much of Western philosophy—from classical rhetoric to modern symbolic logic—can be seen as a drive to come up with more systematic and precise formulations of just what constitutes valid reasoning.

Questions of correspondence and knowledge still exercise philosophers, but in the everyday discourse about thinking and reasoning they are taken as unproblematic. In fact when they are raised, the discussion is often characterized as being too philosophical. Even within philosophy, there are schools (such as analytic philosophy) in which the problems raised by the first two items are pushed aside, not because they are uninteresting, but because they are too difficult and open-ended. By concentrating on formalisms and logical rules, the philosopher can develop clear technical results whose validity can be judged in terms of internal coherence and consistency.

There is a close correlation between the rationalistic tradition and the approach of organized science. In a broad sense, we can view any organized form of inquiry as a science, but in ordinary usage more is implied. There must be some degree of adherence to the scientific method. This method consists of a series of basic steps (that can be repeated in successive refinements of the science):

[The scientific method] can be described as involving the following operations: (a) observation of a phenomenon that, henceforth, is taken as a problem to be explained; (b) proposition of an explanatory hypothesis in the form of a deterministic system that can generate a phenomenon isomorphic with the one observed; (c) proposition of a computed state or process in the system specified by the hypothesis as a predicted phenomenon to be observed; and (d) observation of the predicted phenomenon.- Maturana, "Biology of language: The epistemology of reality" (1978), p. 28.

The scientist first notes some regularity in the phenomena of interest— some recurring pattern of observations. He or she proposes a conceptual or concrete system that can be set into correspondence with the observations and that can be manipulated to make predictions about other potential observations. Conditions are created in which these observations can be expected and the results used to modify the theory. Scientific research consists of setting up situations in which observable activity will be determined in a clear way by a small number of variables that can be systematically manipulated. This simplicity is necessary if the modelling system is to make predictions that can be checked.

The rationalistic orientation not only underlies both pure and applied science but is also regarded, perhaps because of the prestige and success that modern science enjoys, as the very paradigm of what it means to think and be intelligent. In studies of thought, emphasis is placed on the form of the rules and on the nature of the processes by which they are logically applied. Areas of mathematics, such as symbolic logic and automata theory, are taken as the basis for formalizing what goes on when a person perceives, thinks, and acts. For someone trained in science and technology it may seem self-evident that this is the right (or even the only) approach to serious thinking. Indeed, this is why many workers in artificial intelligence find critiques like that of Dreyfus (What Computers Can't Do, 1979) obviously wrong, since they challenge this deep-seated preunderstanding. In defense, they argue that the only conceivable alternative is some kind of mysticism, religion, or fuzzy thinking that is a throwback to earlier stages of civilization.

It is scarcely surprising, then, that the rationalistic orientation pervades not only artificial intelligence and the rest of computer science, but also much of linguistics, management theory, and cognitive science—three areas with which artificial intelligence has been closely associated. In the next three sections we will examine each of these areas in turn, seeing how rationalistic styles of discourse and thinking have determined the questions that have been asked and the theories, methodologies, and assumptions that have been adopted.

First, however, a caveat is in order. In presenting these elements as part of an overall rationalistic tradition, we are aware that they are not uniformly accepted in carefully reasoned work of analytic philosophers.1 However it would be a mistake to therefore not take this tradition seriously. It pervades the work of those same philosophers and of researchers in computer science and psychology as well. In moments of careful reflection they acknowledge the importance of phenomena that are not subject to the rationalistic style of analysis, but in their day-to-day work they proceed as though everything were. In generating theories and in building programs, they operate in a style that is fully consistent with the naive tradition and avoid areas in which it breaks down. In the end, we are really concerned not with the philosophical arguments, but with a broader phenomenonthe role of a tradition in giving orientation to people who do not consider themselves philosophers, but whose ways of thinking nevertheless embody a philosophical orientation.

## 2.2 Language, truth, and the world

Much of our book is an attempt to show the non-obviousness of the rationalistic orientation and to reveal the blindness that it generates. In pursuing this, we found ourselves deeply concerned with the question of language. The rationalistic tradition regards language as a system of symbols that are composed into patterns that stand for things in the world. Sentences can represent the world truly or falsely, coherently or incoherently, but their ultimate grounding is in their correspondence with the states of affairs they represent. This concept of correspondence can be summarized as:

1.Sentences say things about the world, and can be either true or false.

2. What a sentence says about the world is a function of the words it contains and the structures into which these are combined.

3. The content words of a sentence (such as its nouns, verbs, and adjectives) can be taken as denoting (in the world) objects, properties, relationships, or sets of these.

Of course most people will not be able to formulate these assumptions directly. For example, they may not be aware of the distinction between 'content words' (like "dog" and "disappear") and 'function words' (like "of" and "the"). But they would find none of these statements surprising or unintuitive.

The relation of these assumptions to more formal studies of semantics is more complex. During this century a large body of work has been produced that systematically examines meaning from a formal analytical perspective.2 Its goal is to explain the regularities in the correspondence between what we say and what we mean. There are two levels at which to define the problem. First, there is the problem of 'semantic correspondence.' Just what is the relationship between a sentence (or a word) and the objects, properties, and relations we observe in the world? Few philosophers adhere to the naive view that one can assume the presence of an objective reality in which objects and their properties are 'simply there.' They recognize deep ontological problems in deciding just what constitutes a distinct object or in what sense a relation or event 'exists.' Some limited aspects (such as the reference of proper names) have been studied within the philosophy of language, but it is typically assumed that no formal answers can be given to the general problem of semantic correspondence.

The second, more tractable level at which to study meaning is to take for granted that some kind of correspondence exists, without making a commitment to its ontological grounding. Having done this, one can look at the relations among the meanings of different words, phrases, and sentences, without having to answer the difficult question of just what those meanings are.3

There are many different styles in which this study can be carried out. The approach called 'structural semantics' or 'linguistic semantics'4 deals only with the linguistic objects (words, phrases, and sentences) themselves. The fact that "Sincerity admires John" is anomalous or that "male parent" and "father" are synonymous can be encompassed within a theory relating words (and posited features of words) to their occurrences in certain kinds of phrases and sentences. Within such a theory there need be no reference either to the act of uttering the words or to the states of affairs they describe.

This approach is limited, however, because of its dependence on specific words and structures as the basis for stating general rules. Most theories of semantics make use of a formalized language in which deeper regularities can be expressed. It is assumed that each sentence in a natural language (such as English) can be set into correspondence with one or more possible interpretations in a formal language (such as the firstorder predicate calculus) for which the rules of reasoning are well defined. The study of meaning then includes both the translation of sentences into the corresponding formal structures and the logical rules associated with these structures. Thus the sentences "Every dog has a tail," "All dogs have tails," and "A dog has a tail" are all translated into the same form, while "I walked to the bank" will have two possible translations (corresponding to the two meanings of "bank"), as will "Visiting relatives can be boring" (corresponding to different interpretations of who is doing the visiting).

Most current work in this direction adopts some form of 'truth theohizati eng.W az under sumptions as follows:

1. There is a system of rules (which may include 'pragmatic' and contextual considerations) by which sentences of a natural language can be translated into formulas of a formal language, such that the essence of their meaning is preserved.

2. There is another system of rules by which the meanings of formulas in this formal language are determined in a systematic way by the meanings of their parts and the structures by which those parts are combined.

3. There are systematic rules of logic that account for the interrelation of the truth conditions for different formulas.

4. The fundamental kind of sentence is the indicative, which can be taken as stating that a certain proposition is true. Its meaning can be characterized in terms of the conditions in the world under which it would be true.

In addition to these assumptions, there is a general understanding that in order for the compositional rules to be of interest, the meanings of the items being composed should be fixed without reference to the context in which they appear. If the meaning of each item could vary arbitrarily with each use, the rules for composing meanings would be vacuous. There would be no systematic notion of a meaning of the item which applied to all of its uses. Of course, this context-independence cannot be taken as an absolute; there are obvious recognized exceptions.5 But the central theory of meaning (semantics) deals with words and sentences in terms of their literal meaning, which is treated as not context-dependent. We will discuss the consequences of this assumption in Chapter 5.

The correspondence theory of language is one cornerstone on which other aspects of the rationalistic tradition rest. Rationalistic theories of mind all adopt some form of a 'representation hypothesis,' in which it is assumed that thought is the manipulation of representation structures in the mind. Although these representations are not specifically linguistic (that is, not the sentences of an ordinary human language), they are treated as sentences in an 'internal language,' whose connection to the world of the thinker follows the principles outlined above.

## 2.3 Decision making and problem solving

Another modern embodiment of the rationalistic tradition is in the discipline of management science, a field concerned with mathematical analyses of decision making and with behavioral analyses of human conduct. In this discipline, decision making is regarded as the central task of management and is characterized as a process of information gathering and processing. Rational behavior is seen as a consequence of choosing among alternatives according to an evaluation of outcomes. Simon characterizes the basic assumption of decision-making theory as follows:

At each moment the behaving subject, or the organization composed of numbers of such individuals, is confronted with a large number of alternative behaviors, some of which are present in consciousness and some of which are not. Decision, or choice, as the term is used here, is the process by which one of these alternatives for each moment's behavior is selected to be carried out. The series of such decisions which determines behavior over some stretch of time may be called a strategy. ... If any one of the possible strategies is chosen and followed out, certain consequences will result. The task of rational decision is to select that one of the strategies which is followed by the preferred set of consequences. - Simon, Administrative Behavior (1976), p. 67.

Simon asserts that rational decision making is a process of choosing among alternatives, and that it involves a series of steps:

.Listing all the alternative strategies.

2. Determining all the consequences that follow upon each of these strategies.

3. Comparatively evaluating these sets of consequences.

In the literature on computers and decision making, a wide range of human activities and concerns are subjected to this kind of analysis. Researchers in simulation, operations research, and game theory (all within what Boguslaw, in The New Utopians (1965), calls the 'formalist approach') apply sophisticated mathematical methods to decisions as varied as the routing of telephone calls, the choice of advertising media for a new product, and the selection of targets for bombing.

These techniques are based on the development of a formal model for the system that will be affected, a set of rules that describe the behavior of the modelled system, and an objective means of assigning valuations to the resulting effects. When calculations based on the model, rules, and valuations are performed, alternatives can be compared and the most highly valued (optimal) one selected.

There have been critiques of this idealization, often from people within management science who object to the narrow assumptions of the formalist approach. Simon, for example, continues his description of the assumptions given above, noting that:

... The word 'all' is used advisedly. It is obviously impossible for the individual to know 'all' his alternatives or 'all' their consequences, and this impossibility is a very important departure of actual behavior from the model of objective rationality. Simon, Administrative Behavior, p. 67.

This caveat is the major contribution of Simon. He treats objective rationality as an idealization, rarely (if ever) achieved in a real situation. Practical decision making only roughly approximates this ideal:

It is impossible for the behavior of a single, isolated individual to reach any high degree of rationality. The number of alternatives he must explore is so great, the information he would need to evaluate them so vast that even an approximation of objective rationality is hard to conceive.... Actual behavior falls short, in at least three ways, of objective rationality as defined in the last chapter:

1. Rationality requires a complete knowledge and anticipation of the consequences that will follow on each choice. In fact, knowledge of consequences is always fragmentary.

2. Since these consequences lie in the future, imagination must supply the lack of experienced feeling in attaching value to them. But values can be only imperfectly anticipated.

3. Rationality requires a choice among all possible alternative behaviors. In actual behavior, only a very few of all these possible alternatives ever come to mind. - Simon, Administrative Behavior, pp. 79ff.

It is important to note, however, that this critique is not an objection to the rationalistic approach, but to the assumption of full knowledge and rationality in applying optimization techniques. Simon argues that systematic reasoning rules can be applied for effective decision making, and can be programmed into computers. Rather than computing all of the consequences, the computer must operate with 'bounded rationality.'

Simon's decision-making theories developed into more general theories of 'problem solving' as he and others made the first attempts to build intelligent computer programs. Rather than concentrating on the kinds of decisions that managers make, researchers studied tasks (such as proving logic theorems and solving simple puzzles) that could be viewed as problems of search in a space of alternatives. The task is characterized in terms of a 'problem space.' Each 'node' of the space is reached by some sequence of actions, and has some consequences relevant to structure of the task. The computer program searches for a solution in this potentially huge space of possibilities, using 'heuristics' to guide the search and to provide valuations. In this search it will explore only some of the possible alternatives, and will apply its valuation heuristics in the absence of full knowledge.

Programs of this sort are described more fully in Chapter 8, and are the textbook examples of artificial intelligence. There is a widely accepted definition of what constitutes 'general problem-solving behavior:'

A person is confronted with a problem when he wants something and does not know immediately what series of actions he can perform to get it.... To have a problem implies (at least) that certain information is given to the problem solver: information about what is desired, under what conditions, by means of what tools and operations, starting with what initial information, and with access to what resources. The problem solver has an interpretation of this information-exactly that interpretation which lets us label some part of it as goal, another part as side conditions, and so on. Consequently, if we provide a representation for this information (in symbol structures), and assume that the interpretation of these structures is implicit in the program of the problem solving IPS [Information Processing System], then we have defined a problem. - Newell and Simon, Human Problem Solving (1972), pp. 72-73.

There are several key elements to this view of problem solving, which is generally taken for granted in artificial intelligence research:

1. Task environment. First, we characterize the problem in terms of a 'task environment' in which there are different potential 'states' of affairs, 'actions' available to the problem solver to change the state, and 'goals' from which rational actions can be derived.

2. Internal representation. Second, the problem solver has some kind of 'representation' of the task environment. This representation is a collection of 'symbol structures' that are part of the constitution of the problem solver. They correspond in a systematic way to the task environment.

3. Search. The problem solver goes through an information process that can be analyzed as a search among alternative courses of action, in order to find those that will lead to a desired goal.

4. Choice. Finally, a rational agent will select the course of action among those found that best achieves the desired goals. Newell, in "The knowledge level" (1982, p. 102), calls this the 'principle of rationality': "If an agent has knowledge that one of its actions will lead to one of its goals, then the agent will select that action." Of course we must allow for the case in which more than one action may lead to one of the goals, so we cannot predict the specific action, but just that "The action that occurs at any instant is a member of the selected set of actions.' ",

More formally, we can describe the operation of the problem solver in terms of a search in a problem space determined by the task environment and internal representation. Although there is much to be said about just how this can be applied to different cases (for example, the role played by having multiple representations, as discussed by Bobrow in "Dimensions of representation," 1975), the differences are not germane to answering our larger questions about what computers can do. There is a shared background that cuts across the detailed schools of artificial intelligence and that is in general accord with the rationalistic tradition. We will explore some of these topics more fully in Chapter 11.

## 2.4 Cognitive science

In recent years there have been efforts to unify theories of human thought and language from within the rationalistic tradition under a new discipline known as 'cognitive science.' Initially, several books were put forth as volumes in cognitive science.6 The journal Cognitive Science began publication in 1977, and the Cognitive Science Society held its first annual meeting in 1979.7 A number of other conferences, journals, and research funding programs have followed.

Of course cognitive science is not really new. It deals with phenomena of thought and language that have occupied philosophers and scientists for thousands of years. Its boundaries are vague, but it is clear that much of linguistics, psychology, artificial intelligence, and the philosophy of mind fall within its scope. In declaring that it exists as a science, people are marking the emergence of what Lakatos calls a 'research programme.'8 Lakatos chooses this term in preference to Kuhn's 'paradigm' (The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 1962) to emphasize the active role that a research programme plays in guiding the activity of scientists. He sees the history of science not as a cyclic pattern of revolution and normal science, but as a history of competing research programmes. He distinguishes between 'mature science,' consisting of research programmes, and 'immature science,' consisting of "a mere patched up pattern of trial and error."

A research programme is more than a set of specific plans for carrying out scientific activities. The observable details of the programme reflect a deeper coherence which is not routinely examined. In the day-to-day business of research, writing, and teaching, scientists operate within a background of belief about how things are. This background invisibly shapes what they choose to do and how they choose to do it. A research programme grows up within a tradition of thought. It is the result of many influences, some recognized explicitly and others concealed in the social structure and language of the community. Efforts to understand and modify the research programme are made within that same context, and can never escape it to produce an 'objective' or 'correct' approach.

The research programme of cognitive science encompasses work that has been done under different disciplinary labels, but is all closely related through its roots in the rationalistic tradition. Cognitive science needs to be distinguished from 'cognitive psychology,' which is the branch of traditional (experimental) psychology dealing with cognition. Although cognitive psychology constitutes a substantial part of what is seen as cognitive science, it follows specific methodological principles that limit its scope. In particular, it is based on an experimental approach in which progress is made by performing experiments that can directly judge between competing scientific hypotheses about the nature of cognitive mechanisms. In most experiments, situations are created in which the variety of action is strictly controlled and only a very limited aspect of the situation is considered relevant to the patterns of recurrence (typical examples are experiments with rats in mazes, nonsense-syllable memorization, and the matching of geometrical figures to simple descriptions).

The assumption underlying this empirical research is that general laws can be found in these restricted cases that will apply (albeit in a more complex way) to a much broader spectrum of cognitive activity. It is also implicitly assumed that these laws will have the same general form as those of sciences like physics, and can be subjected to rigid experimental test.

In the last few decades, simple forms of cognitive psychology have been challenged by advocates of 'information-processing psychology,' who assert that cognitive systems can be best understood by analogy to programmed computers. The assumptions behind this approach can be summarized as follows:

1. All cognitive systems are symbol systems. They achieve their intelligence by symbolizing external and internal situations and events, and by manipulating those symbols.

All cognitive systems share a basic underlying set of symbol manipulating processes.

3. A theory of cognition can be couched as a program in an appropriate symbolic formalism such that the program when run in the appropriate environment will produce the observed behavior.

This approach is not incompatible with the earlier non-computational models. In general the rules postulated as governing recurrences could be embedded in appropriate programs. In this sense, a program is a formal system that has some number of variables and that can be manipulated (run) to generate predictions about the behavior (outputs) of some naturally occurring system that it is intended to model. To the extent that the predicted behavior corresponds to that observed, the theory is supported. The role of the computer is to enable the scientist to deal with more complex theories than those whose consequences could be determined by examination or by manual computation. This makes it feasible for cognitive theories to be more intricate and complicated than their predecessors and still remain under empirical control.

In trying to deal with phenomena that do not have the obvious limitations of the sparse experimental situations of cognitive psychology, researchers have turned to artificial intelligence—the design and testing of computer programs that carry out activities patterned after human thought and language. These programs are then taken as theories of the corresponding human behavior. As Simon says in "Cognitive science: The newest science of the artificial" (1981, p. 24): "Most of our knowledge [of intelligence] will have to come from...observation of the vast variety of intelligent systems. .and from formal theories-—mainly in the form of computer programs-induced from that body of observation."

Many difficult issues are raised by the attempt to relate programs to theory and to cognitive mechanisms. Within the cognitive science community, there is much debate about just what role computer programs have in developing and testing theories. We will not present the details of that debate, however. It is more important to understand how the discourse is determined by a taken-for-granted background shaped by the underlying assumptions of the rationalistic tradition, as we have outlined in this chapter. In the rest of this book we pose challenges to those assumptions, and in the end argue that we need to replace the rationalistic orientation if we want to understand human thought, language, and action, or to design effective computer tools. Implicit in our critique is a statement about the cognitive science research programme-not that it is vacuous or useless, but that it will have important limitations in its scope and in its power to explain what we are and what we do.9
