> 来源：How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.))
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.))\How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.)).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 2 There are no optimal solutions to design problems

Design almost invariably involves compromise. Sometimes stated objectives may be in direct conflict with each other, as when motorists demand both good acceleration and low petrol consumption. Rarely can the designer simply optimise one requirement without suffering some losses elsewhere. Just how the trade-offs and compromises are made remains a matter of skilled judgement. There are thus no optimal solutions to design problems but rather a whole range of acceptable solutions (if only the designers can think of them) each likely to prove more or less satisfactory in different ways and to different clients or users. Just as the making of design decisions remains a matter of judgement so does the appraisal and evaluation of solutions. There are no established methods for deciding just how good or bad solutions are, and the best test of most design is still to wait and see how well it works in practice. Design solutions can never be perfect and are often more easily criticised than created, and designers must accept that they will almost invariably appear wrong in some ways to some people.

## The Design process

## I The process is endless

Since design problems defy comprehensive description and offer an inexhaustible number of solutions the design process cannot have a finite and identifiable end. The designer's job is never really done, and he can always try to do better. In this sense designing is quite unlike puzzling. The solver of puzzles such as crosswords or mathematical problems knows when he has finished and can often recognise a correct answer, but not so the designer. The designer identifies the end of his process as a matter of judgement. It no longer seems worth the effort of going further because the chances of significantly improving on the solution seem small. This does not mean that the designer is necessarily pleased with his solution, but perhaps unsatisfactory as it might be it represents the best that he feels can be done. Time, money and information are often major limiting factors in design and a shortage of any of these essential resources can result in what the designer may feel to be a frustratingly early end to the design process. Some designers of large and complex systems involving long time scales are now beginning to view design as a continuous and continuing, rather than a once and for all process. Perhaps one day we may get truly community-based architects for example who live in an area constantly servicing the built environment as doctors tend their patients.
