> 来源：How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.))
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.))\How Designers Think. The Design Process Demystified (Bryan Lawson (Auth.)).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# 8 Types and Styles of thinking

The highest possible stage in moral culture is when we recognise that we ought to control our thoughts.

Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man

T r  ole  e on the few general ideas that illuminate the whole, and of persistently organizing all subsidiary facts around them. Nobody can be a good reasoner unless by constant practice he has realised the mportance f getting hold of the big ideas and hanging onto them like grim death.

A. N. Whitehead, 1914 Presidential address to the London Branch of the Mathematical Association

## Theories of thinking

In this section we shall turn our attention from the study of design problems to those who solve them: designers. What kinds of people make good designers, and what kinds of attitudes, skills and abilities do they bring to bear on the problem ? Of all the questions we can ask about design the matter of what goes on inside the designer's head is by far the most difficult and yet the most interesting and vital. This leads inevitably into the realm of cognitive psychology, the study of problem solving and creativity, in short of thought itself. Thinking is one of the most notoriously intractable parts of psychology since the thought process is not easily observed. It need not be started by, nor concerned with current events in the environment, and moreover it need not conclude with any communication to the outside world. The designer, however, has never resembled Rodin's "Thinker" who sits in solitary meditation, but has in contrast always externalised his thoughts, not only as an end-product in the form of a design, but as an integral part of the process itself in the form of drawings and sketches. The whole purpose of doodles, sketches or models is to act as a kind of additional memory to freeze and store spatial ideas which can then be evaluated and manipulated. These drawings and models, taken together with interviews with designers and their writings, offer some insight into the thought processes involved in design. In successive chapters we shall look in detail at the designer's thought processes in terms of his philosophy, general strategy and specific techniques. However first we shall briefly review the way psychologists have studied and classified the thought processes which we may expect to comprise the act of designing.

No subject can have attracted more contrasting theories throughout the history of psychology than the phenomenon of human thought. The great behaviourist Thorndike believed that human intelligence comprises only one basic process, the formation of associations. Since his early writings many behaviourist psychologists have tried to explain thinking purely in terms of direct associative links between stimuli and responses. Watson even went so far as to argue that thinking is really only subvocal speech or "talking to ourselves". Indeed Jacobsen and Marx found evidence of peripheral muscular activity during thinking, but of course, failed to show that this was actually the thinking itself. Hull modified the idea, suggesting that the muscular activity was so small as to have no effect save to act as feedback to the thinker. The idea behind such an apparently curious notion was that in this associationist model of thought each of our responses could be fed back to act as another stimulus eliciting yet a further response. Writers such as Osgood (1952) and Berlyne (1965) eventually abandoned the search for "muscular thought" and introduced the notion of purely cortical responses. For Berlyne, patterns of thought result from us choosing from a variety of responses which we associate with each stimulus. The choice is made simply by selecting the strongest associative link although these links can be strengthened or weakened by our experience of life.

In essence the behaviourist view is that it is unnecessary to hypothesise a complex mental mechanism where behaviour can be explained without one. The question of course is : can the behaviourists adequately explain intelligent thought? In fact their theories have appeared most successful in explaining behaviour such as learning and the acquisition of physical skills. The rat in the psychologist's maze can be seen as learning to associate the response "left" or "right" with the stimulus of each junction. Thorndike expanded this simple idea by placing cats in puzzle boxes where a variety of bolts or catches needed to be released to open the cage. The cats escaped by trial and error and thus apparently learned to solve a problem. Behaviourists have thus tended to explain problem-solving or goal directed thinking in terms of successive mental trial and error. Actually the associationist model of thought seems more applicable to imaginative thought or daydreaming. Here the thinker is not wilfully controlling direction but is rather allowing his thoughts to wander.

However satisfactory or not their theories may be the behaviourists have contributed little which may be used by the designer wishing to improve his thinking skills. By contrast, the Gestalt school of psychology established a tradition of studying problem-solving which is continued today by such writers as Edward De Bono. Gestalt theories of thinking concentrate on processes and organisation rather than mechanisms. Wertheimer (1945) saw problem-solving as grasping the structural relationships of a situation and re-organising them until a way to the solution is perceived. This already begins to sound more like designing than Thorndike's cats, but Wertheimer went even further. He maintained that this mental re-organisation of the situation is achieved by applying various modes of attack such as redescribing the problem and the use of analogous situations. As we shall see later this forms the essence of a number of quite recently proposed design techniques. Whereas the behaviourists used animals to explain thought the Gestaltists used animals to show the absence of human-like thought. The Gestaltists were also very interested in perception and therefore stressed the importance of context in thought. De Groot's (1965) use of words in describing Kohler's experiments with apes is most revealing.

Thus for De Groot thinking depends upon acquiring the ability to recognise relationships, patterns and complete situations. In his study of chess De Groot shows how experienced chess players "read" situations rather than "reason them out" as do the less experienced. The chess master can play so many games simultaneously simply because each time he sees a board he is able to recognise the pattern of the game. This "schooled and highly specific way of perceiving" combined with a "system of reproductively available methods in memory"" produces a rapid and inscrutable response which, to the unitiated observer, looks like an intuitive flash of genius. Paradoxically, the chess master may also spend far longer examining a situation than his less experienced counterpart simply because he can see more problems, perhaps further ahead, than the average player.

Markus ( 1969) listed four basic sources of information available in a design decision-making situation: the designer's own experience, others' experience, existing research and new research. It is perhaps the inevitable mixing of these sources which contributes to designers' seemingly random behaviour, sometimes apparently intuitively leaping to conclusions whilst at other times making very slow progress.

The Gestalt psychologists paid particular attention to the way we represent the external world inside our heads. Most notably Bartlett in his now classical studies of thinking (1958) and remembering (1932) developed the notion of an internalised mental image which he called the "schema". The schema represents an active organisation of past experiences which is used to structure and interpret future events. In a series of experiments in which Bartlett asked subjects to remember drawings and reproduce them perhaps several weeks later, he showed how such memory is dependent on the drawings being meaningful. That is, we must have already formed the appropriate schemata in advance to interpret and appreciate events. More recently, developmental psychologists such as Bruner and Piaget have shown how human thought processes develop in parallel with the child's formation of such basic and fundamental schemata.

The advent of electronic communication devices and information processing machines such as computers has generated a new perspective on human thought. Information theory has provided a metric which allows the amount of information processed during a problem to be measured. Psychologists have attempted to uncover the mechanisms with which we think by measuring our performance on simple tasks against the amount of information processed. Such writers as Posner appear to bridge the gap between the behaviourists and Gestaltists by concentrating on mechanisms while still viewing thinking as a strategic skill. Garner's influential book on cognitive psychology reports experiments in short term memory, discrimination, pattern perception, and language and concept formation all using information theory to provide the yardstick for human performance. Other workers in this field have proposed theories of human problem solving based on the model of the computer program. The most famous application of this technique being the G.P.S. (General Problem Solver) program of Newell, Simon and Shaw (1958). Such programs cause the computer to exhibit behaviour resembling such hitherto peculiarly human characteristics as "purpose" and "insight". This at least shatters some of the mystique surrounding work on thought processes by showing how sequences of very elementary information transformations could account for the successful solution of complex problems. Whether such simple processes are actually the basis of human thought is of course still open to considerable doubt. Unfortunately there are limitations to the usefulness of such computer programs as models since they rapidly become as complex as the processes they model.

The new cognitive approach to human thinking sees man as a much more adaptable and genuinely intelligent organism than the early behaviourist approach. It deals with process and operational function rather than physical mechanism, and it stresses the influence of the context in which problems are perceived on the thought process itself. The cognitive psychologists, while building on the Gestalt tradition, also follow on from the first flush of enthusiasm shown by psychologists for applying information theory to human thought, but are rather less fanatical about its potential. In his brilliant treatise on cognitive psychology Neisser (1967) points out that humans are different from machines from the very beginning of the perceiving and thinking process: "humans ... are by no means neutral or passive towards incoming information. Instead they select some parts for attention at the expense of others, recording and reformulating them in complex ways." As we shall see in later chapters this phenomenon of our selective perception of problems has exercised the minds of many design methodologists who seek to devise ways of broadening designers' perceptions.

Perhaps the most important feature of the cognitive psychology approach to thinking is the new recognition of the existence of some kind of executive controlling function in the mind. Since cognitive psychology accepts that information is actively reorganised and reconstructed in memory rather than passively recorded and recalled, it follows that something must control this process. The existence of such an executive function was denied not only by classical association theory but also by the Gestaltists, however more recent work on artificial intelligence has shown how executive routines in computer programs can control the order in which a very complex sequence of operations are performed in extremely flexible and responsive ways. There is not space here to do justice to this profound and fascinating subject but the interested reader will find brilliant and readable discussions of the matter in Plans and the Structure of Behaviour (Miller, Galanter and Pribram 1960) and the Ghost in the Machine (Koestler 1967). If the cognitive psychologists prove to be right about such an executive then we may expect to discover much more about the way we design since it is clearly the executive which is responsible for switching our attention from one part of a problem to another or allowing us to reorganise our perceptions in new ways. As we shall see these are vital skills for the designer.

The cognitive theorists' approach to thinking is also attractive to those who seek to understand the design process because it draws many parallels between thought and perception. Both primary and secondary processes are postulated, the primary thought process being a multiple activity like parallel processing in computers. These crudely formed thoughts are similar to the preattentive processes in vision or hearing, being only drawn to our conscious attention if selected for detailed and deliberate elaboration by the secondary processes. It is in the secondary processes where all the real work is done. These processes have to be learnt and developed and are obviously dependent upon what is already memorized and the way material has been organised in primary processing. The cognitive theories thus lay great emphasis upon the way we organise perceived information and store it. Failure to recall is seen as analogous to a failure to notice something in a visual scene. Thus attention in perception and thought is seen as responsible for directing our thoughts and thus crucial to problem solving. This theme will be taken up again in a rather less theoretical and more practical way when we consider methods of stimulating creativity and improving problem solving skills in design.

## Types of thinking

In his classic treatise on the human mind Ryle (1949) observes that "thinking" is a polymorphous concept. Like the term "farming", Ryle suggests, "thinking" embraces many different kinds of activity which may have little in common. Just as one farmer may be milking his cows while another reaps his crops, so two thinkers may not necessarily appear to share common activities. Psychologists have tended to study thinking by attempting to divide and classify types of activity which could be investigated separately. Perhaps the most well used division is that between "reasoning" and "imagining", both of which are obviously needed in design.

When "reasoning" the individual is said to carry out mental operation within some coherent symbolic system. Reasoning is considered purposive and directed towards a particular conclusion. This category is usually held to include logic, problem-solving and concept formation. When "imagining", on the other hand, the individual is said to draw from his own experience, combining material in a relatively unstructured and perhaps aimless way. Artistic and creative thought as well as daydreaming are normally considered imaginative.

This kind of simplistic taxonomy is perhaps as misleading as it is apparently helpful. If reasoning and imagining were truly independent categories of thought one should not be able to speak sensibly of "creative problem-solving" or a "logical artistic development", which are both quite meaningful concepts. Many kinds of problems, even in such apparently logical disciplines as engineering, can be solved creatively and imaginatively. Certainly art can be logical and have well developed structure. Indeed it is even possible to study the structure of art forms using the logic of information theory (Mueller 1967). Only rarely can one find an instance in the real world outside the psychologist's laboratory when one kind of thought is employed in isolation. The mode of thinking employed is obviously very much dependent on the nature of the situation. Most writers have concentrated on two main related factors, the thinker's relation to the external world, and the nature of the control he exercises over his thought processes.

Murphy (1947) suggested that mental processes are bipolar, being influenced both by the external world and by inner personal needs. In his study of personality Murphy was particularly interested in the individual's susceptibility to these two influences, and the resultant predominance of certain thinking styles which could be observed in the individual. The normal person is rarely entirely preoccupied by either one of these influences for any amount of time but rather alternates between the two. It is, however, possible to identify conditions under which one would expect the normal person to attend more to one influence than the other.

Problem-solving obviously requires more attention to the demands of the external world than to inner mental needs. In imaginative thinking on the other hand the individual is primarily concerned with satisfying his inner needs through cognitive activity which may be quite unrelated to the real-world. This seems to offer the psychological distinction between design and art as discussed earlier. Design is directed towards solving a real world problem while art is largely selfmotivated and centres on the expression of inner thoughts. This does not mean that imaginative thought can be excluded from the design process but that its product will probably always need evaluation by rational thought in order that the designer's work should be relevant to his real-world problem. The control and combination of rational and imaginative thought is one of the designer's most important skills and we shall discuss this crucial issue further in the next chapter on creativity.

A very popular approach to the study of human intelligence is represented by the factorial school. This work holds that human intelligence is not a simple factor but rather a whole series of related factors each of which may be present to greater or lesser extents in any individual. In his review of such work Guilford (1956) concluded that intellectual factors could be divided into the two major groups of thinking and memory. The thinking factors, which are of most interest here, Guilford further subdivided into cognition, production and evaluation.

The cognition factors of human thought have to do with becoming aware of and understanding classes of objects or ideas. This analytic ability to classify and recognise is of the utmost importance in everyday thought. For example it would not be possible to study the differences between the structural systems employed in romanesque and gothic churches unless one could first recognise and classify such buildings. Guilford maintains that there are three ways of developing such a class system depending on whether the figural, structural, or conceptual content is used. Thus one might recognise a class by its figural properties. Children may initially recognise all four-legged animals as cows and only later look for further detail such as horns or tails. The second system of class recognition, by structural content, requires some functional relationship to exist between class members such as in the "complete the series of symbols" type of I.Q. test question. Finally one might recognise a class conceptually, such as architects or lawyers as being a group of people having passed certain examinations. For Guilford then, these cognition factors influence our ability to define and understand problems whether they be to do with the appearance, function or meaning of objects. As Guilford himself points out, problems of figural and structural types abound in design and the ability to discriminate figural and structural classes is likely to be important to the designer.

Guilford's second group of thinking factors is concerned with the production of some end result. "Having understood a problem we must take further steps to solve it" (Guilford 1967). Just as Guilford's cognition factors deal with the ability to recognise figural, structural and conceptual order so the production factors hypothesise our ability to generate or produce these three kinds of order, but Guilford found that the reality was not quite as neat as the model suggested: "In the investigation of planning abilities it was hypothesised that there would be an ability to see or to appreciate order or the lack of it, as a feature of preparation for planning. It was also hypothesised that there would be an ability to produce order among objects, ideas or events, in the production of a plan. A single ordering factor was found."

Thus Guilford found not two abilities to handle structure or order, but one which seemed to belong amongst the production factors rather than the cognition factors. This is a most interesting observation in the light of Lawson's (1972) experiments quoted earlier which tended to show that architects discover about the structure of their problems by attempting to generate order in their solutions, and lends more weight to the argument that analysis and synthesis in design should not be regarded as entirely separate activities. Unfortunately few psychologists seem to have considered both the recognition and production of order at the same time so for the time being we must accept the distinction since the literature on productive thinking has several useful concepts to offer the student of design.

## Productive thinking and design

When Wertheimer (1959) introduced the notion of "productive thinking" he was primarily concerned with the directional quality of thought; "what happens when, now and then, thinking forges ahead?" He showed with a whole series of small experiments how, when in a problem situation, thinking can be productive if it follows an appropriate direction. There are at least two fundamental questions which the experimental psychologist can ask here. Is the thinker trying to control the direction of his thinking and if so is the direction productive or not?

It is clear that mental processes are bipolar in their directional quality just as in their relation to the external world. The thinker can wilfully control the direction of his thought or he can allow it to wander aimlessly. The normal person does not solely engage in either one kind of thought, but rather varies the degree of directional control he exercises. Here is another distinction between design and art. The designer must consciously direct his thought processes towards a particular specified end, although he may deliberately use undirected thought at times. The artist however, is quite able to follow the natural direction of his mind or to control and change the direction of his thinking as he sees fit. Bartlett's (1958) classification could be used to support this argument distinguishing as it does between the artist's thinking and that of the designer : "There is thinking which uncovers laws of finished structure or of relations among facts of observation and experiment. There is thinking which follows conventions of society or of the single person, and there is other thinking still which sees and expresses standards."

Clearly the search for, and expression of, standards forms an important part of artistic thought. The designer must primarily indulge in Bartlett's first kind of thinking in order that he can appreciate the relationships between the given elements of his problem. The amount of purely expressionistic thinking he may do is largely a function of the degree to which he is allowed to generate his own constraints. As we have seen this varies considerably from problem to problem and there will thus inevitably be many instances when design and art are indistinguishable with this test.

Bartlett goes on to suggest two main modes of productive thinking which he calls "thinking in closed systems" and "adventurous thinking". A closed system, in Bartlett's definition, has a limited number of units which may be arranged in a variety of orders or relations. Formal logic is such a closed system as are arithmetic, algebra and geometry. Closed system thinking can be highly creative as in the case of discovering new mathematical proofs or making anagrams. Bartlett identifies two processes in closed system thinking, interpolation and extrapolation. Here again we see the concept of the directionality of the thought process :

Genuine thinking is always a process possessing direction. In interpolation the terminal point and at least some evidence about the way there are given, and all that has to be found is the rest of the way. In extrapolation what provided is some evidence of the way; the rest of the way and the terminal point have to be discovered or constructed. So it is in extrapolation that directional characters or properties are likely to become most prominent.

Although these two processes of interpolation and extrapolation are attractive concepts, when we consider real world design conditions the situation loses some of its clarity. Rarely in design does one know or not know the terminal point but rather one has some information about it ; it is a matter of degree. In some kinds of design one knows exactly where one will end up, in others one has very little idea.

Bartlett's other mode of productive thought, adventurous thinking, is less clearly defined than thinking in closed systems. In this mode of thought the repertoire of elements which can be considered is not prescribed. Indeed, adventurous thinking often depends for its success upon elements not normally related being brought together in a new way, hence its adventurous nature. Yet again however the distinction between adventurous thinking and thinking in closed systems becomes blurred when applied to design situations. It is certainly possible to find examples of closed system problems in design if we look for them. The problem of arranging tables and chairs in a restaurant certainly requires thinking in closed systems. Often, however, such examples do not bear too close an examination for rarely does the designer work exclusively with a kit of parts. If a particular arrangement of tables will not fit, the designer may often be free to try different sizes or shapes of tables or even alter the shape of the restaurant! Thus the ensemble of elements in design problems is usually neither entirely closed nor entirely open. In fact we often recognise a creative response to a design problem as one where the designer has broken free of a conventionally restricted set of elements. Thus the rigid imposition of closed systems as in the case of system building is seen by many designers as a threat to their creative role.

Throughout much of the literature on productive thought we find a variety of closely related binary divisions between on the one hand rational and logical processes and on the other hand intuitive and imaginative processes. These two major categories have become known as convergent and divergent production. Typically the convergent task requires deductive and interpolative skills to arrive at one identifiably correct answer. Convergent ability is measured by many of the conventional I.Q. test problems and has been associated with ability in science. The divergent task demands an open ended approach seeking alternatives where there is no clearly correct answer. Divergent ability can be measured by tests mistakenly called creativity tests such as "how many uses can you think of for a brick" and divergent ability has been associated with skill in the arts. As we shall see in the next chapter these two ideas have frequently been grossly oversimplified and variously confused with intelligence and creativity. Guilford (1967) and others treat convergent and divergent thinking as separate and independent dimensions of ability which can occur in any proportions in an individual. Guilford maintains that, although few real-world tasks require exclusively convergent or divergent thought, the distinction is still valid and useful.

From our analysis of the nature of design problems it is obvious that, taken as a whole, design is a divergent task. Since design is rarely an optimisation procedure leading to one correct answer clearly divergent thinking will be required. However there are likely to be many steps in any design process which themselves pose convergent tasks. True, such steps may eventually be retraced or even rejected altogether, but it would be absurd in the extreme to pretend that there are no parts of design problems which are themselves amenable to logical processes and having more or less optimal solutions. Design clearly involves both convergent and divergent productive thinking which is probably what makes it so challenging and satisfying to practise.
