> 来源：The Social Life of Things Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Arjun Appadurai)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Social Life of Things Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Arjun Appadurai)\The Social Life of Things Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Arjun Appadurai).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe

COLIN RENFREW

A contrast is often drawn between societies with relatively undifferentiated and unspecialized economic systems on the one hand, and those where craft-specialist production and large-scale exchange of commodities take a significant role on the other. In the former, sometimes described as operating under a "domestic mode of production," activities yielding food for local consumption occupy most participants for most of their working time, and the exchange of goods takes place mainly in order to obtain necessary or desirable items from neighboring territories. In the latter, commercial activities play a significant role, and production and exchange for gain occupy a substantial proportion of the population.

This distinction was emphasized by the "substantivists" among economic anthropologists, notably Polanyi (1957), who stressed the "embeddedness" of the economy within a wider social matrix in most early societies. They criticized the tendency of the "formalists" among their colleagues to apply the analytic techniques of the modern economist, developed primarily for the description of modern industrial economies, to the very much simpler societies under consideration. The substantivists argued that the economic man of the modern economist could not be assumed to have operated in the societies in question. Clearly there is much justice in that critique, but Adams (1974) has pointed out that the market mentality, the desire to make a profit, is certainly not restricted to the modern world or to that of classical antiquity. To claim that the market was an innovation of ancient Greece, as Polanyi effectively did, may have been to oversimplify.

While it is no doubt the case that the distinction between "simple" and "complex" economies has been unduly exaggerated in the past, and such polarizing categories are perhaps best avoided, there are nonetheless valid differences and contrasts underlying these debates. The archeologist cannot fail to be aware that in most hunter-gatherer economies, and in the early days of farming in any area, the emphasis seems to have been primarily upon subsistence and there is thus some equivalence with the first of the two polar categories. Likewise in early state societies, and especially in the early empires, there was often an emphasis upon the intensification of production, with the concentration of several products within the hands of an élite, thus making comparison with the second category appropriate.

The interesting question is how, in what circumstances, and by what processes, did the latter situation come about? How did these more complex economies emerge? To ask this question, let me stress, is not to adopt a prepared theoretical standpoint: it does not, for instance, assume an "evolutionary" or "neo-evolutionary" perspective. It does, however, imply a development through time of the societies in question, and hence a diachronic perspective. This is something that only the archeologist can provide, since almost without exception societies in the first category had not developed their own writing systems, and without written records the techniques of the historian are not appropriate. Nor has the transition to a developed economy, in the absence of significant external factors of acculturation, been studied, so far as I am aware, by any anthropologists over the past century or so. For almost by definition, the presence of anthropologists bespeaks the beginning of the process of absorption of the economy under study into what neo-Marxist writers would term a world system.

The investigation of such processes of economic development is thus in most places a task for the prehistoric archeologist. But the interest of the study goes beyond archeology, for the significant innovations are of several kinds. In the first place, the processes of intensification of production that are involved generally imply technological developments. Some of these lie in the sphere of subsistence production  development of improved crop species or animal breeds, the use of the plow and other features of what Sherratt (1981) has termed "the secondary products revolution," and perhaps irrigation in some cases. Some technological innovations are of another kind, resulting in the development of new products and sometimes of new materials, such as pottery or metal, often as a result of developments in pyrotechnology. Such developments do not work in the technological sphere alone. They imply, and sometimes arise from, developing social systems. New products, new commodities (such as pottery, or bronze) do not come into the world simply as a direct and inevitable result of their own physical properties. They may, indeed, in some cases be the result of some fortunate invention, but, as I have argued elsewhere (Renfrew 1978), it is the widespread adoption of the new activity or product, not simply the discovery of a new technical process, that constitutes the true innovation. This means, then, and no economist has ever denied this  not even a formalist one - that we cannot discuss commodities or the development of the economy without considering such embedded social concepts as value and demand.

Now the notion of value is not an easy one to analyze, even in a society where rates of exchange can be directly observed. I should at once add here that I see some force in the arguments of Binford (1969, 163) that "psychological preferences" in archeology, using explanations based upon assumed states of mind of prehistoric people for which there is no direct evidence, are best avoided. Binford, I rather think, regards a concept like value as belonging to what Pike (as quoted by Harris 1968, 571) would term an "emic" category: something existing primarily in the thoughts and minds of individual members of a given community. But value can also be an "etic" category: something that acts upon the material world in a manner that can be observed and evaluated cross-culturally, for which the modern observer can therefore gather relevant material evidence.'

Some years ago, in considering the growth of complex society in the prehistoric Aegean and the development of a trade in metal goods, I suggested that a crucial equation was "a symbolic equivalence of social and material values":

The essential kernel of many of the interactions between activities and between subsystems, interactions which are the mainspring for economic growth, develops from the human inclination to give a social and symbolic significance to material goods. For in this way a whole complex of activities in the material world satisfies aspirations, ambitions, and needs which are, at first sight, entirely without adaptive significance in facilitating the continued existence of the individual of the species (Renfrew 1972, 497).

This observation was made primarily in relation to a single specific instance of the emergence of a state society. But there is no doubt that it can be applied in several other areas. In prehistoric Britain, for instance, around 2000 B.C. we see for the first time the use of various materials, including gold, amber, and bronze, in contexts indicating that they were associated with high prestige. Indeed, what we see emerging is not simply certain new commodities, but in a sense, a new kind of prestige. Or at least an altogether new way of expressing prestige. To assert this, of course, opens up exciting new possibilities in the development of social archeology. For it is generally accepted that high status, associated with prestige, was in general not a feature of small and early human societies, in particular hunter-gatherer societies. Ranking and stratification, in whatever area of the world we may have under study, seem in general to have appeared later. That is, of course, a very broad generalization, but it rests only partly on the archeological evidence. Its main validation comes from the observation of living hunter-gatherer societies by anthropologists.

This is an area ripe for analysis, for even though archeologists have often, quite reasonably, assumed certain assemblages of objects  for instance, rich gravegoods accompanying a burial  to be indicative of the high status of the individual, the precise grounds for such a view have never been analyzed in any very satisfactory manner.2

There is also a further interesting question, recently stressed by Hodder (1982b, 212) concerning the active role of material culture. As he argues, it does not follow that the prestigious objects that we see, whether in a burial or elsewhere, associated with a notable individual, are simply the reflection of his or her high status. That is a reflectionist mode of thought into which many archeologists have too easily fallen (Hodder 1982a, 4). On the contrary, these aspects of material culture may themselves have been responsible in large measure for bringing about that high status, a point very much in harmony with the thinking, years ago, of Veblen (1899) on conspicuous consumption and display. High status can actually be achieved by the manipulation of material goods and by displays of wealth, as many analyses of big man systems have indicated. In studying commodities of high value we may, therefore, be doing more than monitoring the assertion of high status; we may be investigating what brought it about. What is evidently needed here is a framework of inference that allows these issues to be handled lucidly.

In several areas of the world it has been noted, in the case of metallurgical innovation in particular, that the development of bronze and other metals as useful commodities was a much later phenomenon than their first utilization as new and attractive materials, employed in contexts of display, when they were clearly associated with high prestige and evidently regarded as of high value. In the sections that follow I first develop some of these ideas in relation to interesting finds from Varna cemetery in Bulgaria. That gold at Varna was a commodity of high value is argued, not taken as given. The significance of changing notions of value for the development of an economy with more intensive production and more widespread distribution of products is discussed in the final section of this essay.

## Varna and early copper metallurgy

## Commodity and innovation

The development of metallurgy is one of the clearest cases in which essentially the same innovations were made repeatedly and independently, in different parts of the world at different times. For though it can be argued, for instance, that the domestication of maize is not at all the same thing as the domestication of wheat, and that the notion of the development of food production is thus very much the construct of the archeologist, the domestication of each species being in reality a very different happening, the same can hardly be said for metal working. The smelting of ores to produce copper, or the alloying of copper with tin to produce bronze, are in most cases ultimately the same from the technical point of view wherever they are carried out.

For this reason, perhaps, there have been frequent suggestions that there was only one invention of metallurgy. This view was well expressed and well argued by the late Theodore Wertime (1964) twenty years ago: "One must doubt that the tangled web of discovery, comprehending the art of reducing oxide and sulfide ores, the recognition of silver, lead, iron, tin, and possibly arsenic and antimony, as distinctive new metallic substances, and the technique of alloying tin with bronze, could have been spun twice in human history." However, this is an argument that need not be replayed here. It has effectively been demonstrated that metallurgy in the New World had separate origins and developments from those in the Old World. It is even likely that metallurgy in China developed independently of that in Western Asia. It has been argued on several occasions that there is a good case for the independent origin of copper metallurgy in southeast Europe. The same is true for Iberia. What interests us here is to understand more clearly how these independent innovations of a new commodity may have occurred.

There are two other old misconceptions that need to be clarified. The first, which goes back to the original Three Age System, and more particularly to Gordon Childe's Marxist elaboration of "Archaeological Ages as Technological Stages" (Childe 1944), was to regard the inception of copper/bronze metallurgy, and later of iron working, as technologically and productively significant events in their own right. In most cases, however, as noted earlier it was many centuries after the basic techniques were explored and understood that they became of economic and productive significance.³ The same observations hold for iron working. Iron was known and valued in the Near East for centuries before the iron age began. Similarly, there are not-infrequent finds in Mycenaean Greece at least two centuries before iron weapons begin to be seen in appreciable numbers. One might predict that similar circumstances would apply in most areas where there was an indigenous development of metal technology, although clearly the impact of an imported technology upon a less developed native one can be decisive (as was the case, for instance, with the demand for iron nails in eighteenth-century Polynesia). It should be stressed, then, that it is not the new technology itself that is decisive, but the use to which it is put.

The second and related point that deserves emphasis is the misconception that the key to the adoption of important innovations is the diffusion of the essential new knowledge that underlies most of them. This view underlies the work of many geographers, who speak of "the diffusion of innovations" as if they were dealing with the propagation of some new virus, or the dissemination of a gene through successive generations of a population. Such models may be appropriate when there really are major demographic shifts, as in the case of the spread of farming, but what Hägerstand (1967) calls innovation diffusion as a spatial process is only one approach to the subject. Another is to stress factors endogenous to the society in question. In many cases the technology has been readily available for a considerable period of time before it comes into widespread use in a manner that is so productive as to promote efficiency in a way that is adaptively advantageous.

## The social context

It is my argument, then, that the decisive innovation in the development of a new commodity is generally social rather than technical. Often the technology is already there.

This point is, I believe, well exemplified by the case of metalurgical development in southeast Europe in the so-called chalcolithic period. Indeed, the explanatory problem there, as perhaps in most cases of early metallurgical development, is not to explain why people did not at once use this great technology. It is, on the contrary, to understand why they bothered at all. For until the technology develops a great deal further, as it can only do through intensive use, early copper metallurgy does not produce anything decisively useful at all. The artifacts that can be produced from native copper by an annealing process have very few properties to recommend them in comparison to well-chosen stones, and many that are lacking.

In most cases early metallurgy appears to have been practiced primarily because the products had novel properties that made them attractive to use as symbols and as personal adornments and ornaments, in a manner that, by focusing attention, could attract or enhance prestige. It is striking that copper had such a key place in the

## Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe

prestige systems of North America, for instance. In the same way in China, evidence for a copper age or for the very early development of bronze metallurgy may largely be lacking precisely because metal was used primarily for the production of prestige objects, notably bronze vessels, and stray finds of inconsequential objects are very rare. In the same way in the Old World we find iron in the early phases always as a material of great worth, whose context in rich burials and in other finds indicates a prestigious status. Only much later was it used to make productive tools, and at the same time it became commonplace.

## The case of Varna

Let us now turn to the case of the Varna cemetery. The discovery there, some ten years ago, of a series of burials with rich gravegoods including many objects of gold, aroused great interest when their very early context was appreciated. Although copper metallurgy can be documented earlier in the Near East, the goldwork of Varna is the earliest significant (that is, substantial) occurrence of the use of gold anywhere in the world (Renfrew 1978a). (It should be noted that in addition to the main cemetery near Varna, sometimes termed Varna I, a second cemetery has been found in the area, designated Varna II. It is earlier, and the gravegoods are much less rich. When no distinction is made, the main cemetery - Varna I  is meant.)

But Varna had a second significance for southeast Europe. Hitherto the chalcolithic cultures of the Balkans have always appeared within an economy in most respects egalitarian. The villages so far discovered have houses of about the same size, and the one larger building sometimes observed has quite reasonably been regarded as a communal structure analogous to the "men's house" in some societies. Special finds such as the earlier figurines of Nea Nikomedeia or the gold amulets from Chotnitsa have given rise to the suggestion that there may have been village shrines. Hitherto neither the village plans nor the artifacts found have suggested any very salient social ranking in the Balkan chalcolithic.

Very few cemeteries have been well documented from this area and period. But what we have known of them has not conflicted with the impression given by the contemporary cemeteries of Hungary. There are disparities in the gravegoods, perhaps comparable to those documented for a slightly later period at Bran in Czechoslovakia by Susan Shennan (1975). She was able to show distinctions between the sexes and some indications of hereditary status, but no very salient ranking.

Varna gives a very different impression. The quantity of the gravegoods in some of the graves is in itself very striking. Moreover, there are special artifacts in some of the rich graves that are likely to be in themselves indicative of very special status. The finds at the cemetry have not yet been published in full, but there is a good preliminary publication by Ivanov (1978), and the same author (Ivanov 1982) has detailed many grave groups in the catalog of the 1982 exhibition of the Isetan Museum of Art. It is not yet feasible to give any quantitative analysis, but some important points of qualitative analysis can be faced. By 1982, 204 graves had been found. Among these are 35 containing no skeletons. These are classed by the excavators as "symbolic graves" (cenotaphs) in the context in question (although the possibility of bone decay must be seriously considered). The "symbolic graves" are subdivided into rich graves (three in number, with numerous gravegoods: Graves 1, 4, and 36); graves containing clay masks of human faces (three in number); simple symbolic graves (21 in number); and graves containing reburied parts of human skeletons (seven in number). The second major category is "graves with skeletons situated in a straight supine position," of which 59 are reported. The third category is "graves with skeletons placed on one side and flexed"; 41 are reported. These three main categories total 135; presumably some of the total of 204 have not yet been excavated or assigned a category. Five major issues present themselves.

1. Relative value of materials. It cannot be assumed that materials that we esteem highly, such as gold, were necessarily of high value in the context in question. For instance, four of the richest graves contain a total of 2,200 gold objects weighing, 4,921 grams, and it could therefore be argued that gold was not so rare or valuable as other materials. But five arguments serve to stress its value: First, gold is used as a personal adornment in proximity to the body in two key positions that are recognized as particularly important in a crosscultural perspective: the face (numerous adornments, in position, for instance, on the clay masks, as in Grave 2); and the genitals (gold penis cover, Grave 43). Second, gold is prominent in objects that from their position may be regarded as of prime symbolic value. These are the "maces" or "scepters," which the position in the grave indicates were buried in the hand of the deceased (Grave 43) or were otherwise prominent in the assemblage (Graves 1, 4, and 36). Third, gold is dissembled; that is to say, objects sometimes are made to look as if they were made of gold when they are not. This is an important general principle, for in cases of deliberate deception it is axiomatic that the device has the purpose of making the object look more rather than less valuable. (A different principle might apply when taking valuables through a customs examination). This point is illustrated by the piece of gold leaf still adhering to the shaft-hole axe of stone that was carried on top of the golden scepter of Grave 4. Clearly the intention was to make the axe look as if it were made of gold.

Fourth, gold is used more economically (in terms of mass) than comparable materials such as copper. It is notable that there appear to be no gold items made by a casting process.4 The melting points of gold and copper are approximately the same, and it would be interesting to learn if there are technical aspects, apart from the abundance or rarity of the material, that make the former more difficult to cast. The copper objects from Grave 4 are solid, and though their weights are not published, must together come close in weight to the five kilograms that the gold from the cemetery totals. The use of sheet gold in effect gives the maximum surface area of the material in terms of its weight: a good criterion of ascribed value. Fifth, gold is inherently attractive. This criterion is listed last because I have not yet presented arguments to make it other than subjective. Two objective points are relevant: it reflects light efficiently; that is, it is bright, indeed dazzling; moreover, it does not tarnish (oxidize); it is unchanging through time, incorruptible. This point is further discussed below.

These arguments warrant the inference, which is thus no longer an intuitive assumption, that gold was a high-value material at Varna. The arguments could be further developed to show that it was probably the highest-value material that is found in several graves.

2. Inherited (ascribed) rather than achieved status. Several children's or infants' graves in the cemetery are rich in their gravegoods, although none falls within the wealthiest class (Graves 17 and 110 fall into this class). It is suggested that these children had inherited status. However, the argument could be put that they are children of adults of high achieved status, and that the manner of interment reflects the status of the parents rather than that of the child.

3. Salient ranking. There are massive disparities in the cemetery in terms of (a) the number of gravegoods; (b) the quantity of high-status materials, mainly gold; (c) the presence of symbolic insignia, including gold headdresses, gold pectoral ornaments, and scepters; (d) the presence of unusual categories of artifacts, for instance, the pottery vases decorated with gold paint from Grave 4. Prominent status, reflected in conspicuous burial, raises the possibility that the Varna society should be considered a chiefdom, in the sense employed by Service (1962) and by Sahlins (1972).

4. Sex of high-status individuals. Both women and men were buried with rich gravegoods. Unfortunately, three of the four richest graves, the only ones where gold scepters are buried, are cenotaphs, containing no skeletons. The fourth is Grave 43, where the deceased was male, aged 40 to 45 years. It is possible that the hypothetical office of "chief" was held exclusively by males, but there is no case at present for assuming that it was not held also by females.

5. Symbolic distinctions between the sexes. Full publication of the archeological findings will be necessary before the gender of the putative chiefs can be satisfactorily settled. It might be possible to determine the likely sex of the deceased honored in the three rich cenotaphs. A preliminary analysis suggests that two artifacts - the shaft-hole axe of stone or copper and the bone (or marble) "Idol" - are of considerable symbolic significance, since they are found singly, although with other objects in many graves. They are found with skeletons of both men and women, and the idol is found with children. The pattern of occurrence needs further study.

## The wider social context

It is meaningless to talk of a "chiefdom" on the basis of a single place, especially a single cemetery. For the interest of such a term is that it relates to social organization, and the whole point of a chiefdom society is that the center has an organizing role beyond the domestic or village level. The concept thus has spatial implications. A question that needs to be answered for Varna, then, is what is the larger spatial significance of the Varna finds? Are we to expect other Varnas, other cemeteries with very pronounced disparities in status, consonant with chiefdom society?

Hitherto our picture of the Balkan chalcolithic has been one of a mosaic of essentially independent, autonomous villages  indeed, a segmentary society whose components are cellular and modular. Of course, these societies were linked by exchange networks and no doubt by many ties of kinship. The larger unities, reflected in the geographic distribution of pottery styles, were often considered tribal by earlier generations of scholars, who sought to see behind the Gumelnitsa culture or the Vina culture or the Cucuteni culture corresponding "peoples." But these ethnic categories are now much less clear. We lack recent work that discusses in sufficient detail the evidence for social or political groups beyond the village level. The means of integration, other than kinship and exchange, are  if they existed  still obscure. We do not have in southeast Europe ceremonial centers of evidently public nature to compare with the Stonehenge monuments of Britain or the Hopewell ceremonial complexes in the United States.

What, then, was the regional organization, if any, during the chalcolithic? Ivanov (1978) has hinted that the different scale of the tell mounds in the chalcolithic may indicate some settlement hierarchy; this is an important issue not yet argued in detail. If we are to regard Varna as the seat of a chiefdom, as the cemetery finds certainly suggest it may have been, it should also be the center of an organizing hierarchy that can be interpreted in spatial terms.

One specific issue that may be helpful here, when more progress has been made, is the question of the source of the gold. Occasional gold finds are quite common in the chalcolithic, although the Chotnitsa find is the only other one that might be termed a treasure. There has already been speculation about far-flung trading links and remote sources for this gold. But I shall be astonished if the gold was procured outside the immediate territory of the Varna polity. Its radius of direct influence cannot have been, I would suggest, more than 100 kilometers at the outside, and that would make a very large territorial unit. The distance from center to periphery in an Early State module is rarely more than 70 kilometers (Renfrew 1975, 19), and chiefdom societies are often of comparable scale. I shall be very surprised if the source of the Varna gold were more than 50 kilometers from Varna itself.

This is not to deny the more extensive nature of the exchange networks then in existence, most graphically illustrated by the distribution of marine shell, much of it originating in the Mediterranean, rather than the Black Sea (as has been securely shown for Spondylus gaederopus). It is possible that the Varna Spondylus was carried thither by sea through the Dardanelles, and it is significant that the largest workshop for Spondylus yet known for the Balkan chalcolithic was at Hirova, again on the Black Sea coast. But the effciency of the landbased exchange routes operating up from Aegean coastal settlements and those of the immediate hinterland, such as Sitagroi, should not be underestimated.5

## Metallurgy at Varna: the "chrysolithic"

In the foregoing section several problems were raised about the nature of chalcolithic society in the light of the Varna discoveries. It is clear that copper metallurgy developed in the Balkans long before it did in the Aegean, although there are stray finds in the Aegean that indicate, as suggested earlier, that the technology in its rudiments had been invented or acquired during the late neolithic. The essential difference is that in the Balkans the metallurgical products were integrated much more closely into contexts of social use within the contemporary material culture. This created demand or need, and from this demand came increased output, and a steady increase in technical accomplishment.

This stage is splendidly exemplified by the Varna finds, which are of course chrysolithic (that is, gold-stone) as much as they are chalcolithic (copper-stone). Indeed, it is gold that is used, and takes pride of place, for most purposes of display. Copper ornaments are in fact less common at Varna than in copper-age cemeteries farther north and west because they are largely displaced by gold.6

Comparison of the occurrences of gold and copper at the main Varna cemetery (Varna I) makes it clear that copper has already moved from the role of the merely decorative, which it seems to have had in the earlier Varna II cemetery, to the productively useful. The main copper forms found in Varna I are the pin, the flat chisel, the narrow chisel or wedge, the long, narrow chisel, sometimes with curved end, and a range of forms of shaft-hole axes, ranging from the squarish Vidra type to the very elongated. It is, however, particularly interesting that there is still a comparable range of shaft-hole axes of stone — in this form we catch the evolution at the transition from stone to copper. The stone axes are found in some of the poorer graves (for example, Grave 7), but an elegant and slender one, sheathed in gold, was mounted on the scepter to form part of the rich assemblage of Grave 4, where it obviously had a ceremonial role. In Grave 1 the comparable position is taken by a copper axe.

We see here the replacement of stone by copper in what seems to have been initially a ceremonial or prestige role. This lends force to the suggestion that initially the material was appreciated as a new vehicle for display, and that its genuinely novel and productively useful mechanical qualities only later came to govern its use.

## Value and commodity in wider perspective

## Wessex and the Aegean bronze age

The case of the Varna cemetery suggests a number of interesting problems and questions that deserve further investigation. It raises the issue, seen also very clearly in the early bronze age of the Aegean and of northern Europe, of the relationship of the use of metal objects for display purposes to the development of personal ranking within the societies in question. The recognition by the archeologist of personal ranking within a prehistoric society depends in part on the recovery of artifacts associated with the person, generally accompanying burial of the body. In some cases the very artifacts that suggest early ranking in society simultaneously document the early use of metal. The association is thus not a coincidental one, and there is a risk of circularity in the argument here; but it can be overcome by careful analysis.

One of the most interesting features of the Varna cemetery, as noted above, is that it appears in a context that was previously regarded as more or less egalitarian - that is to say, where evidence for marked disparities in personal possessions was lacking, not only from the gravegoods of the known cemeteries, but also from finds in domestic contexts. There is, of course, again the risk of circularity, since without such archeologically notable indicators of possessions as metal objects, it is inherently more difficult to observe such disparities as may have existed. But our conclusion here does not depend exclusively upon the presence of metal objects. Other materials have a significant place among the gravegoods, which also include significant forms, such as the scepters, that could still be recognized if they were made, for instance, of stone.

In Varna, then, we see striking indications of high personal status occurring at approximately the same time as the development within the society of attractive commodities by which high status may be expressed. Yet it would have been possible for high status to be expressed, albeit less effectively, by the inclusion of very large quantities of high-value objects already in circulation (such as shell bracelets) without the presence of the new metal commodities. It is, moreover, possible that gold was available as a material at an earlier date but was simply not exploited until the Varna period. (This conclusion of course depends upon a local origin for the gold, proposed earlier.)

A similar conjunction between new commodities and the new kind of prestige that is seen in the personal possession of attractive objects is reflected in the Wessex culture of the British early bronze age and in the preceding Beaker period. Here, however, it is accompanied by another very interesting and suggestive feature: the widespread appearance of burial by individual inhumation, often under a prominent burial mound. Although there was a wide variety of burial practices in the preceding neolithic period in Britain, many of these were collective, and involved the placing of the remains (often after a process of excarnation  that is, allowing the bones to become free of flesh) within a collective burial place, sometimes of impressive, indeed monumental, scale. Cemeteries of individual inhumations are not found, in contrast to the position in central Europe, where there are numerous cemeteries of the Linearbandkeramik culture, as well as in some succeeding phases.

In the British case, a distinction was drawn some years ago between the earlier societies, which practiced conspicuous collective burial, entirely without notable gravegoods, and these later ones, where rich gravegoods are found accompanying favored individuals. At one extreme lie societies where personal wealth in terms of valuable possessions is not impressively documented, but where the solidarity of the social unit was expressed most effectively in communal or group activities. At the other are societies where a marked disparity in personal possessions and in other material indications of prestige appears to document a salient prestige ranking, often without evidence of large communal meetings or activities (Renfrew 1974, 74).

The discussion has been taken much further in a number of recent articles by S. J. Shennan (1982), Thorpe and Richards (1982), and Braithwaite (1984). Shennan (1982, 157) draws upon work by Gilman (1976) in southeast Spain, where it is argued that emerging hierarchies need to be sanctioned by appropriate ideologies, and that the ritual of collective burial was not appropriate to such ideologies. Instead there emerged a new ideology, in which hierarchy was legitimated through the consumption of prestige items by individuals. Shennan accepts this perspective, but suggests that the increase in social differentiation had taken place in Britain earlier, during the neolithic, and that we can see the early bronze age changes rather as the catching up of conservative ritual with the social changes that had already occurred. He makes the same point in relation to comparable changes in Brittany: "The monumental nature of the late neolithic tombs, and other megalithic phenomena of Brittany suggest again that here we have a hierarchically differentiated society prior to the early bronze age, and that the early bronze age sees a change in the form of its ritual expression, with a move from collective monumentality to individual consumption of goods" (1982, 157). The important point here is that "the rituals involved in this new ideology were based not on the collective labor of the community but on the consumption in burial of prestige items and symbols obtained by means of contact with members of elites elsewhere and/or through the activities of specialist craftsmen." This tendency toward the expression of male prestige in burial can be traced back to the preceding Beaker period, but then in the context of only a very limited degree of hierarchical differentiation. And Shennan stresses, as others have noted from Childe onward, that over this period "it is difficult to avoid relating the increase in social differentiation in some way to the growth of the copper and bronze industry and the opportunities it offered for the generation and control of a surplus" (Shennan 1982, 159).

Braithwaite has again discussed this issue within a broader context of ritual discourse and conflicting ideologies, concluding that "there was a gradual move away from the genealogical basis of the earlier system of prestige and towards a system in which material symbols, such as metal artefacts, were used more directly to signify status and accrue prestige" (Braithwaite 1984, 106).

This case has many analogies with the position in the prehistoric Aegean. There we see the appearance around 3300 B.C. of the practice of inhumation in cemeteries in the Cycladic Islands, although in small family graves rather than as individual burials. At the same time, the gravegoods reflect increasing disparities in wealth and prestige. A similar process is seen in Crete (although the burials there in the round tombs remain collective ones, but they are accompanied by rich gravegoods), and it culminates there in the formation of Minoan palace society around 2100 B.C.

The aftermath was very different in each of the three cases under consideration. At Varna, the period of rich burial was followed by, and indeed may in part be contemporary with, the development of a full copper age, when copper axe-adzes were common, along with other useful tools. But this was a short-lived phase, followed by the effective collapse of this flourishing society of Old Europe, and by a period of decline, with reduced metal production and with none of the indicators of hierarchical organization that we glimpse at Varna, nor of the ritual sophistication that we infer from some of the domestic sites of the Varna period.

In the Aegean the early bronze age, which is the period when individual burial and differences in ranking first emerge, is followed by the Minoan and Mycenaean palace civilizations. But we should note that it is not until the later bronze age that bronze tools were of frequent and widespread occurrence, as evidenced by the tool hoards of the Mycenaean period. During the early bronze age, despite the finding of a few tool hoards, bronze was used mainly for objects of high prestige value, notably for weapons.

Likewisduring the British later bronz age, metal objects no longr accompany burials to the same extent, after the early phase of florescence, and individual burial with rich gravegoods is no longer seen. This is not difficult to understand within the perspective advanced by Shennan and Braithwaite, from which the rich burials of the early bronze age are viewed as establishing or validating through ritual practice a hierarchy based in part upon new acquisitive principles. There is evidence that in the later bronze age, land tenure was an increasingly important issue, and metal objects are then found in hoards and sometimes in ritual deposits, but not in graves. This was the period of the development of the flourishing bronze industry of the developed European bronze age, as Sherratt (1976) has well described, with its extensive trade networks. In northern Europe by this time bronze was no longer a novelty, nor any longer a commodity prestigious in itself.

There are many differences between the trajectories of social development in the three areas here discussed. This is to be expected, particularly in view of the differences in the sources of metal and in the exchange systems by which metal and metal objects were distributed. It is, however, the similarities that are relevant here. I suggest that there are real structural or processual similarities between the use of prestige goods accompanying individual burials in the Aegean early bronze age, and their comparable use in the early bronze age of Britain nearly a thousand years later. The Varna finds are very different; it is not yet clear how typical the Varna cemetery in fact was among its contemporaries in southeast Europe. But again it raises, and perhaps helps to solve, some of the analytical problems involved.

What we appear to be seeing in each case is the very early use of metal in the area in question in contexts that at the same time are documenting the emergence of personal ranking, reflected in what may have been individually owned goods, buried with the deceased in the grave. Copper and gold clearly afford in each case a new vehicle for the expression of ranking, and thus in this sense a new channel of communication. Indeed, it may be suggested that they are not merely reflecting or documenting a degree of ranking in society that would have existed in any case without them. On the contrary, the ownership and display of these valuable objects may have constituted an essential part of the prominence of their owner and have contributed significantly to his or her prestige. It may be permissible, then, to see these materials as playing a more active role, and rather than simply reflecting a social structure, as taking a significant role in its very formation.

## Aspects of value and prestige: the perspective of Marx

In view of the wide influence upon anthropologists of Marx's discussion of value and of commodities and of the useful categories that he established, it is convenient to relate his views to the cases just examined. As early as 1867 Marx usefully redefined the distinction between use value, "the utility of a thing" (Marx 1970, 44), and exchange value, "the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort." He proceeded in his analysis to stress that what commodities have in common is that they are products of labor. "As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labor time" (ibid., 47). In shorthand it may be convenient to think of this aspect in terms of labor value.

These terms were used lucidly by Marx in his analysis of capitalist economies, but they form part of what may be termed a formalist analysis. They are less satisfactory when applied to those classes of object that Dalton (1977) has described as "primitive valuables." These are the objects that are especially prized, and have symbolic significance, such as the vaygu'a, the valuable exchanged in the kula ring in the Trobriand Islands. These are to be contrasted with the mere gimwali, the everyday objects circulating in petty market exchange. Here it is possible, so Dalton asserts, to identify different spheres of exchange, and it is simply not appropriate to exchange valuables for common, everyday goods. These valuables, such as shell bracelets or in the case of the British neolithic, perhaps, the jade axes that are handsome objects but unsuited for the productive functions of an axe serve to call into question Marx's dictum (1970:48) that "nothing can have value without being an object of utility." But it should be noted here that Marx may not have intended his labor theory of value to apply to precapitalist situations.7

Here it is appropriate to turn to another famous passage from Marx, entitled "The fetishism of commodities and the secret thereof," in which he speaks, with justice, of "the mystical character of commodities": "A commodity appears at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties" (Marx 1970, 76). It is worth quoting a further celebrated and suggestive passage, although it is one that leads to a conclusion seemingly not appropriate to the cases under consideration here, however relevant it may be to capitalist economics:

But it is different with commodities. There the existence of the things qua commodities, and the value relation between the products of labor which stamps them as commodities, have absolutely no connection with their physical properties and with the material relations arising therefrom. There is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious world. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with life, and entering into relations both with one another and the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. This I call the fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labor, so soon as they are produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities.

This fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labor that produces them (Marx 1970, 77). In the case of primitive valuables, or indeed of valuable materials in our own time, such as gold, this fetishism, as Marx aptly terms it, is easy to recognize. But it is not so easily analyzed in terms of labor value.8

Marx's useful discussion establishes a number of valid distinctions, but from the standpoint of precapitalist socieities, it is curious that he should attach the term "fetishism," in relation to commodities, "the products of labor," rather than to the much less rationally based and less functionally valid prestige value, which is commonly assigned in many societies to objects and commodities that have negligible use value, in a utilitarian or productive sense, and which sometimes represent minimal labor value. It may perhaps be useful to recapitulate, taking Marx's helpful distinctions as a starting point.

In general, value is a property that is assigned to an object in a manner that arises from the social context in question, and it is to some, usually significant, extent arbitrary. It is never a property inherent within an object or material in the manner of such physical and measurable properties as hardness, density, refractive index, and so on. It cannot be measured outside a social context. We speak of value as if it were inherent within the object or commodity, and in doing so we create a metaphor, or mask a reality. So Marx was right to speak of "the fetishism of commodities," although labor is not the only crucial consideration.

Value is something assigned by an individual or by a group. This value may be assigned because of the use potential of the commodity (use value) or because of the work involved in its production (labor value). (Exchange value is a different kind of category: it is a measure, a parameter of value, always expressed as a ratio between two materials. Unlike the preceding, it is not a primary quality.)

Often the term "sentimental value" is used to refer to the estimation that a specific person accords an object when the high estimation is not widely shared. It generally depends upon the specific history of that object in relation to the person in question  it may be grandmother's brooch, or the photo of a close friend. The specific history of an individual object, which is of no particular interest because of its raw material or its workmanship, can also afford it a generally agreed value - for instance, a memento of Queen Elizabeth or of George Washington, or the Stone of Scone. The same is relevant to the reverence accorded objects of religious veneration, whether they be supposed relics of an actual person, or images that command respect, even when the constituent material is not prized - fetishism in the original sense. This may derive in part from the specific history of the object, and in part from an implied use-value, since the image may be believed to have active powers.

So far we have considered two aspects, labor value and use value, that may be considered functionally based. Exchange value is identified as simply a measure, a ratio. Historic or association value (including sentimental value) depends solely upon the unique history or association of the specific object in question.

Turning now to prestige goods, we can see that they generally have value of another kind. Of course, some prestige goods do have unique status: "This was the sword that Prince X used to slay a hundred enemies." But most prestige goods also have a value that, within the given cultural context, is regarded as intrinsic. Following a suggestion of Arjun Appadurai, it may be useful to introduce the term prime value in relation to those materials that in a given culture are regarded as having intrinsic value. This allows us to avoid the use of the term intrinsic, which is desirable because, as noted earlier, no materials have a universal intrinsic value. Prime value is thus the equivalent of ascribed intrinsic value. It was earlier shown that objects of gold had a position in some of the graves at Varna that seems a particularly privileged one. Although each specific object may itself have had a special status through its history of associations, the fact that it was made of gold does seem (in terms of the pattern established) to have been relevant. In view of our own preconceptions about gold, that is not surprising to us. But these simple objects of gold have no special use value, in the utilitarian sense, and little labor value. The same observations can be made about amber in the Wessex graves, and about shell in many contexts.

It is, in fact, easy for us to compile a list of commodities that are of prime value in many cultural contexts (but not in all), and that tend to function in the exchange sphere. Gold and silver are among these, and with them crystal and jade and a series of other translucent stones, as well as objects of shell. Furs may be included and also various fabrics, but since these are manufactured products, their high value does often relate to a high labor value, as Marx suggested.

Having listed these valuable substances, we can go on to find more general underlying principles. We can seek to ask, in other words, what properties genuinely intrinsic to the materials in question may have led to their being regarded as of prime value in many (but not all) societies. These objects and materials are in general conspicuous: they operate upon the senses in an agreeable and attractive manner. They are also rare; only in special (generally ritual) circumstances can very common materials have a high value. Many of them share the property of durability. But others are consumables, such as perfumes or very fine wines. There is in fact a polarity among primitive valuables, between those that are suitable for conspicuous consumption (and that need to be consumed in order to be used at all), such as frankincense and myrrh, and those that have an enduring or even eternal quality, like gold and jade.

It is goods with this prime value that feature prominently in the Varna cemetery and in the two other cases considered. Many burials contain a few useful objects, such as pots or stone tools, and the remainder of the gravegoods are of shell or metal or of fine stone. There are very few objects that can be recognized as of symbolic value that are not also made of a material we can recognize as of prime value at that time. At Varna the bone figurines or idols are the most prominent objects clearly of symbolic value that are made of a material lacking in prime value.

These points take us beyond the categories established by Marx in his classification, and suggest that in many societies some commodities were accorded prime value, regarded by each society as an inherent, intrinsic value. This prime value we may regard as a symbolic construct, and like all symbolic value, it is ascribed, to some extent, in an arbitrary way.9

## Commodity, value, and ranked societies

Halstead and O'Shea (1982) have discussed transactions in which food is exchanged for more durable items of value in terms of "social storage." They have rightly stressed that such valuable items form a suitable vehicle for the development of institutionalized inequality. Halstead (1981, 177) has countered the view that valuables could never be exchanged for food, whereas Gamble (1981) has recently emphasized the need to consider the system of production, especially of agricultural produce, with as much care as the distribution and circulation of goods.

These various studies, like that of Woodburn (1982), usefully introduce the dimension of time into the discussion, and this may prove crucial to our understanding of prestige expressed by, and achieved by, the ownership of goods, which in consequence have high prime value. Many of these goods, as noted above, are durables, indeed conspicuous durables: gold, like diamonds, is forever.

Analysis of gift exchange has always laid great stress upon the standing or prestige an exchange partner achieves in offering a splendid gift. The gesture is in itself a transitory action, but it sets up obligations for a reciprocal gesture of comparable dimensions in the future. But the acquisitive character of the three societies we have been examining suggests rather that the main emphasis may then have shifted to the ownership of prestige goods, as well, no doubt, as their conspicuous consumption in various ways, including burial. Ownership, carrying with it the direct association that can go with personal property, is a state rather than an action. The possession of rich objects carries with it more than the ability to exchange some of them in return for goods and services. By virtue of the prestige it confers, ownership offers access to social networks and to other resources that are closed to those lacking such prestige. In these two senses the ownership of rich objects reflecting and conferring prestige may be regarded as wealth, rather than as an implied obligation to generosity.

The question we are now approaching is at what point and by what means does the value set upon prestige commodities, such as jade axes or gold ornaments, change? How does the ceremonial nature of the primitive valuables of the simpler, egalitarian societies develop into the more active role of the prestige items in the acquisitive societies of the early bronze age Aegean or Wessex? That is to say, at what point does the ownership and display of important objects of desirable materials such as copper and gold play an important part in the achievement and maintenance of the high status of a highranking person? There is no doubt that in earlier times jade axes were valuables, appreciated for their constituent material. But with the inception of metallurgy the material itself  first copper, then bronze, and later iron - came to be used in a number of ways, some of them highly productive, and so took on a more economically significant role. Quite soon we see that the material in question had become a commodity, valued for itself and for the uses to which it could be put, rather than for the actual form it had taken in the specific artifact in question. So it is that we find ingot bars in the late bronze age Mediterranean, and ingot torques in the Central European bronze age, both forms indicating that the metal was valued now as a raw material and was no longer exchanged primarily in the shape of valuable objects reflecting and conferring prestige. By this stage we are talking of a commercial trade, sustained by well-organized production in mines; the process of commoditization is complete.

One aspect to consider here is the manner in which such wealth can be further accumulated. Are ten items ten times as valuable as one item, and one hundred of them ten times more valuable than ten? This rather obvious point does seem significant  the extent to which fungibles are additive in value. It has been usefully discussed by Kopytoff in Chapter 2; this additive quality is one of the attributes that distinguish commodities from "singular" things. In our first case, that of the egalitarian society, we can readily conceive that a person will gain in prestige by giving or by owning a very special axe. The language of prestige could be devalued slightly rather than enhanced, however, if he were to receive or to own ten identical axes. In the acquisitive society of the modern world, this restriction would seem not to hold: wealth here is cumulative, and goods are valued for their exchange potential as well as for their cumulative effects on prestige through display (see Douglas 1967, 126).

What I am grasping at here, of course, is the special factor that distinguishes the role of value and commodity in the simple and undifferentiated societies discussed earlier from their operation in the more complex, ranked ones. For as we saw in the Varna case, such social questions sometimes take precedence over technological ones, even when technological advance is the subject of consideration.

In some cases we seem to see two stages to the process. In the first, which we have looked at in the three cases discussed, high prestige is immediately reflected and perhaps constituted in the ownership of high prime value objects, in their display, and in their consumption.

The second phase, which is seen in the later bronze age of Europe, is accompanied by the production of useful objects in much greater quantities, sometimes with the richer, "primitive" valuables going out of use, or at least declining in significance. In this phase, rich burials may be less common than in the preceding one, and often quantities of mass-produced goods are now seen. The relative lack of exceptionally conspicuous prestige objects (except in a few favorable cases) can give the impression that society is now the poorer, or less prominently hierarchical in structure. But such inferences may be misleading. In the later British bronze age, for instance, there are other indicators of a highly organized, hierarchical society, including the emergence of hill forts, and of extensive territorial boundary systems that are generally interpreted as reflecting more emphasis upon the ownership and control of land. Rathje (1975, 415) has rightly pointed out that mass production does not mean impoverishment. Certainly Henry Ford accumulated more wealth than did competitors who manufactured more prestigious vehicles.

One may suggest that by the later bronze age, commodities were very freely exchanged across the countryside, with less prominent divisions separating the spheres of exchange. Such a situation implies a measure of specialist production, and perhaps the existence of welldefined units of exchange. Such units are generally seen represented by specific objects (such as currency bars in the later British iron age), which can therefore be termed money. As noted earlier, this would to some extent be true both for the aftermath of the early bronze age in northwest Europe and for the later bronze age Aegean.

It is interesting to note here the relationship among three important variables: a developing system of production and exchange; the circulation of goods of prime value (especially in the early stages); and the emergence of prominent social ranking.

The obvious inference is that the three can most readily develop together through a kind of multiplier effect, where each mutually enhances the others. The key in each case may lie in a measure of technical advance, large enough to maintain the novelty and attractiveness of new products. It is the absence of suitable products for this developing process that may explain why fully complex societies did not develop so markedly in some areas of the world (for instance, the Pacific) as in others. From this perspective there had to be a fairly rare commodity, accessible to the society in question but not too readily so, that could serve as a material of prime value. Ideally it should be a commodity whose nature admitted of gradual technological change, so that one year's manufacturing techniques did not provide quite so useful or high-grade a commodity as the following year's. Such a view would, of course, hold for many of the complex societies of the Old World, where developing technology, especially metal technology, had a major role to play. It might serve to explain why the processes of change in other areas rarely led to such sustained growth; the Hopewell complex in North America would be a case in point.

In expressing the beneficial role of a potential for technological growth, and in excluding thereby some areas of the world from such potential, one is not developing a determinist, nor even a strictly functionalist, argument. For the possibility of developing new commodities, within the framework of intensification of production, is certainly not a sufficient condition for the processes of change under discussion; and it may well not be a necessary one. Moreover, we have been insisting upon the importance of the concept of prime value for setting the process in motion and for sustaining its impetus. As discussed earlier, the ascription of high prestige or notional intrinsic value to commodities of low use value and sometimes of low labor value is to a large extent arbitrary and certainly nonfunctional. Yet in the societies under discussion, the practice of ascribing prime value seems to lie at the root of further growth in the economy.

## Notes

I should like to acknowledge the useful comments made on the first draft of this paper by Arjun Appadurai and Robert C. Hunt, as well as by other members of the symposium.

1.In "exchange value," for instance, value is a descriptive term, specifying what has been observed to happen in certain exchange transactions. I would argue that the distinction between emic and etic, although useful in some ways, should not be allowed to dominate research. I am in broad agreement with Binford's view, which boils down to an assertion that what counts is what happens rather than what people think about what happens. Yet clearly the latter does and did influence the former. We use theoretical concepts in many areas of our discipline, and are not debarred from doing so in the field of cognition by any a priori principle. The real danger is, however, of circular reasoning, of the kind so often found to surround the use of such concepts as adaptation and contradiction.

2. The question of whether gravegoods accompanying a deceased person necessarily imply an association while that person was alive has indeed been discussed in recent years. The more interesting issue of the way such an association with special material goods during life may have been indicative of high status has not. If an adequate framework for analysis can be developed (and the contributions in this direction of Winters 1968, S. Shennan 1975, and O'Shea 1978 among others should be noted), then there are good prospects for learning much more of the social behavior of early societies.

3.This is certainly true of the long use of copper in the Aegean late neolithic, when it had a very minimal impact, and of its use, for instance in the Balkans, during the Vina-Turdas period, when there are not infrequent finds of small objects but no explosive development until much later, during the Vina-Plonik phase.

4The curious gold astragalus of Grave 36, weighing 33 grams, appears to be the heaviest single gold object in the cemetery, although it is only two centimeters long; I predict that metallographic examination will show it

to have been shaped from a nugget by hammering rather than by casting. 5.We must refer also to the marble objects at Varna. They include not only simple bowls (for example in Grave 36), known from other Balkan chalcolithic contexts, but a pointed vessel from Grave 41 that has points of resemblance with a find from the Kephala cemetery in the Cycladic Islands. These vessels have been used by some scholars to reopen the question of possible contacts between the chalcolithic Balkans and the Aegean bronze age. But the chronological question is now largely settled, and the only difficulty seems to be the reported presence of Early Helladic II pottery at the Thessalian site of Pevkakia in association with late neolithic/chalcolithic black-on-red painted ("Galepsos") ware. At Sitagroi such painted pottery was a frequent feature in phase III, and the Pevkakia material is closely similar. It is the status, or rather the stratigraphic context, of the Early Helladic II pottery at Pevkakia that must be questioned.

6. We should, however, note the copper bracelet from Grave 3 of the Varna II necropolis; significantly, this is earlier than the main cemetery, and, also from the Varna II cemetery, the copper needles from Graves 3, 5, 6, 11, 15, 17, 26, and others. In fact, analysis shows that the copper needle has a role comparable to that of the copper shaft-hole axe, as a frequent and useful object. Outside these classes, copper finds of small decorative items are not frequent: there is merely a bracelet and ring from Grave 51, three rings from Grave 60, and no doubt a few other examples from graves still unpublished.

7. Evidently the discussion here would center upon the notion of "utility." It can certainly be argued that the "usefulness" of such prestige objects is to excite admiration, to indicate prestige, and to function as valuables in prestige exchange. Such usefulness, however, would be difficult to measure or otherwise quantify.

8. In the treatment quoted, Marx (1970, 95) does not develop the distinction between labor value and exchange value. Of course the price of gold is determined not simply by "the labor time required for its production" (Marx 1970, 95), but by what people are prepared to pay for it; in favorable circumstances, gold nuggets could be found on the surface of the ground, and the labor value could be negligible. What interests us here is precisely why gold, rather than some other material, should be considered a commodity of especially high value. Marx was not primarily concerned with this point.

9. We should note that most societies operate with such notions. Certainly among the hunter-gatherer societies of Australia and the segmentary communities of New Guinea, axes of stone valued as prestige items were traded over long distances from the quarry itself, a practice that finds clear parallels in the British neolithic (Clark 1965). The exchange of exotic materials in such a way seems a near-universal of human existence (Mauss 1954). A number of writers, including Rappaport (1967, 106) and Wright and Zeder (1977) have suggested that these ceremonial exchanges of prestigious objects may fulfill a utilitarian, material function. For by keeping alive gift partnerships and long-distance links even in times when little evident purpose is served by the exchange, societies preserve the opportunity to draw upon the obligations of goodwill and reciprocity, in the form of useful goods including foodstuffs, in times of shortage. The notion of this kind of effective time scheduling is an important one, and Woodburn (1982) has shown how the concept of immediate return versus delayed return is important in societies developing some of the facilities and approaches that are used also in farming societies. Prestige goods of high prime value become a kind of banking mechanism against food shortage, although it should be noted that in normal times ordinary foodstuffs are often considered unsuitable as an object of exchange against primitive valuables, which move in a different sphere of conveyance.

## References

Ads, R. M. 197. Anthropologicl perspectives on ancient trade. Cure Ato 15, 239-58.

Binford, L. R. 1969. Comment. Current Anthropology 10, 162-3.

Braithwaite, M. 1984. Ritual and prestige in the prehistory of Wessex c. 2200-1400 B.C. In D. Miller and C. Tilly, eds., Ideology, Power, and Prehistory, 93-110. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Childe, V. G. 1944. Archaeological ages as technological stages: Huxley Memorial Lecture 1944. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 7, 7-24.

Clark, J. G. D. 1965. Traffic in stone axe and adze blades. Economic History Review 18, 1-28.

Dalton, G. 1977. Aboriginal economies in stateless societies. In T. K. Earle and J. E. Ericson, eds., Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 191-192. New York: Academic Press.

Dlas, M. 1Priitive atnig. InR. Firth, e Theme inint 119-47. London: Tavistock.

Frankenstein, S., and Rowlands, M. J. 1978. The internal structure and regional context of early iron age society in south-western Germany. Bulletin of the Institute of Archaeology 15, 73-112.

Gamble, C. 1981. Social control and the economy. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Archaeology (B.A.R. International Series 96), 215-30. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Gilman, A. 1976. The development of social stratification in bronze age Europe. Current Anthropology 22, 1-8.

Hägerstrand, T. 1967. Innovation Diffusion c: a Spatial Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Halstead, P. 1981. From determinism to uncertainty: Social storage and the rise of the Minoan palaces. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Anthropology (B.A.R. International Series 96), 187-214. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Halstead, P., and J. O'Shea. 1982. A friend in need is a friend indeed: social storage and the origins of social ranking. In C. Renfrew and S. Shennan, ed., Ranking, Resource and Exchange, 92-9. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Harris, M. 1968. The Risef Anthropological Theory. London: Routledge.

Hodder, I. 1982a. Theoretical archaeology: A reactionary view. In I. Hodder, ed., Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, 1-15. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1982b. The Present Past. London: Batsford.

Ivanov, I. S. 1975. Raskopki na Varnenskija eneoliten nekropol prez 1972 g., Izvestija na Narodnija Muzeji Varna (Bulletin du Musée National de Varna) 11, 1-16.

1978. Sukrovishtata na Varnenskiya Chalkoliten Nekropol (Treasures of the Varna chalcolithic necropolis). Sofia: "September." (Text in Bulgarian with translation into Russian, English, and German).

1982. The Varna chalcolithic necropolis. In The First Civilization in Europe and the Oldest Gold in the World  Varna, Bulgaria, 21-121 (exhibition catalog, Isetan Museum of Art, Tokyo). Tokyo: Nippon Television Network Cultural Society.

Marx, K. 1970. Capital, vol. I. London: Lawrence and Wishart (first German edition 1867).

Mauss, M. 1954. The Gift. London: Cohen and West.

O'Shea, J. 1981. Coping with scarcity: Exchange and social storage. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey, eds., Economic Archaeology, 167-186 (B.A.R. International Series 96). Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Polanyi, K. 1957. The economy as instituted process. In K. Polanyi, A. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson, eds., Trade and Market in the Early Empires, 243-69. New York: Free Press.

Rappaport, R. 1967. Pigs for the Ancestors. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Rathje, W. L. 1975. The last tango in Mayapan: A tentative trajectory of productiondistribution systems. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds., Ancient Civilization and Trade, 409-48. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,

Renfrew, C. 1972. The Emergence of Civilisation: The Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third Millennium B. C. London: Methuen.

1975. Trade as action at a distance. In J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds., Ancient Civilization and Trade, 3-60. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,

1978a. Varna and the social context of early metallurgy. Antiquity 52, 199-203.

1978b. The anatomy of innovation. In D. Green, C. Haselgrove, and M. Spriggs, eds., Social Organisation and Settlement, 89-117. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.

Sahlins, M. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine.

Service, E. R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization. New York: Random House.

Shennan, S. E. 1975. The social organisation at Branc. Antiquity 49, 279-88.

Shennan, S. J. 1982. Ideology, change, and the European early bronze age. In I. Hodder, ed., Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, 155-61. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sherratt, A. 1976. Resources, technology and trade in early European metallurgy. In G. Sieveking, I. H. Longworth, and K. E. Wilson, eds., Problems in Economic and Social Archaeology, 557-82. London: Duckworth.

1981. Plough and pastoralism: Aspects of the secondary products revolution. In I. Hodder, G. Isaac, and N. Hammond eds., Pattern of the past: Studies in honour of David Clarke, 261-305. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Thorpe, N., and C. Richards. 1982. The decline of ritual authority and the introduction of beakers into Britain. Paper read at the fourth meeting of the Theoretical Archaeology Group, Durham (England), Dec. 1982.

Veblen, T. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Macmillan.

Wertime, T. 1964. Man's first encounters with metallurgy. Science 146, 1257.

Winters, H. D. 1968. Value systems and trade cycles of the Late Archaic in the Midwest. In L. R. and S. R. Binford, eds., New Perspectives in Archaeology, 175-222. Chicago: Aldine.

Woodburn, J. 1982. Egalitarian societies. Man 17, 431-51.

Wright, H., and M. Zeder. 1977. The simulation of a linear exchange system under equilibrium conditions. In T. K. Earle and J. E. Ericson, eds., Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 233-54. New York: Academic Press.
