> 来源：Digital style history the development of graphic design on the Internet
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Digital style history the development of graphic design on the Internet\Digital style history the development of graphic design on the Internet.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1. Introduction

Web design is an area of rapid development. Since the early 1990s, when the Internet got its graphic user-interface, it has undergone several metamorphoses, from being a primitive medium with wall-to-wall text to becoming an advanced multi-media design phenomenon. To a wide extent, this rapid development is due to the exponential acceleration in the technological development and to the fact that web design did not develop in a vacuum but shares features with development trends in 20th century design and art and with traditional design areas such as industrial design and graphic communication. Within a very short time span, web design has caught up with the material world and now seems to express contemporary trends in an almost exemplary and condensed form (Jensen 1999 9). Like graphic communication, industrial design and art, web design has become an aesthetic phenomenon in its own right and with its own means of expression.

However, so far web design has, within the humanistic and social sciences, been mainly described in terms taken from sociology, media theory, psychology and semiotics, or the discussion has had a purely pragmatic and normative angle, as can be found in the many books and articles that adopt a ‘how-to’ perspective in order to provide guidelines for this new medium. Until now few attempts have been made from the perspective of aesthetic theory to develop reflective approaches to web design. This article should be seen as a tentative step in that direction.

Engholm
