> 来源：Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch)\Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## 6 / Journal of Marketing, January 2004

the sense that it is indeed the whole clan that contracts on behalf of all, for all that it possesses and for all that it does."

This exchange of specializations leads to two views about what is exchanged. The first view involves the output from the performance of the specialized activities; the second involves the performance of the specialized activities. That is, if two parties jointly provide for each other's carbohydrate and protein needs by having one party specialize in fishing knowledge and skills and the other specialize in farming knowledge and skills, the exchange is one of fish for wheat or of the application of fishing knowledge or competence (fishing services) for the application of farming knowledge or competence (farming services).

The relationships between specialized skills and exchange have been recognized as far back as Plato's time, and the concept of the division of labor served as the foundation for Smith's (1904) seminal work in economics. However, Smith focused on only a subclass of human skills: the skills that resulted in surplus tangible output (in general, tangible goods and especially manufactured goods) that could be exported and thus contributed to national wealth. Smith recognized that the foundation of exchange was human skills as well as the necessity and usefulness of skills that did not result in tangible goods (i.e., services); they were simply not "productive" in terms of his national wealth standard. More than anything else, Smith was a moral philosopher who had the normative purpose of explaining how the division of labor and exchange should contribute to social well-being. In the sociopolitical milieu of his time, social well-being was defined as national wealth, and national wealth was defined in terms of exportable things (operand resources). Thus, for Smith, "productive" activity was limited to the creation of tangible goods, or output that has exchange value.

At that time, Smith's focus on exchange value represented a departure from the more accepted focus on value in use, and it had critical implications for how economists, and later marketers, would view exchange. Smith was aware of the schoolmen's and early economic scholars' view that "The Value of all Wares arises from their use" (Barbon 1903, p. 21) and that "nothing has a price among men except pleasure, and only satisfactions are purchased" (Galiani qtd. in Dixon 1990, p. 304). But this use—value interpretation was not consistent with Smith's national wealth standard. For Smith, "wealth consisted of tangible goods, not the use made of them" (Dixon 1990, p. 340). Although most early economists (e.g., Mill 1929; Say 1821) took exception to this singular focus on tangible output, they nonetheless acquiesced to Smith's view that the proper subject matter for economic philosophy was the output of "productive" skills or services, that is, tangible goods that have embedded value.

Frederic Bastiat was an early economic scholar who did not acquiesce to the dominant view. Bastiat criticized the political economists' view that value was tied only to tangible objects. For Bastiat (1860, p. 40), the foundations of economics were people who have "wants" and who seek "satisfactions." Although a want and its satisfaction are specific to each person, the effort required is often provided by others. For Bastiat (1964, pp. 16162), "the great economic law is this: Services are exchanged for services ...It is trivial, very commonplace; it is, nonetheless, the beginning, the middle, and the end of economic science." He argued (1860, p. 43) the following: "[I]t is in fact to this faculty . to work the one for the other; it is this transmission of efforts, this exchange of services [this emphasis added], with all the infinite and involved combinations to which it gives rise .. which constitutes Economic Science, points out its origin, and determines its limits."

TABLE 2  
Operand and Operant Resources Help Distinguish the Logic of the Goods- and Service-Centered Views
<table><tr><td></td><td>Traditional Goods-Centered Dominant Logic</td><td>Emerging Service-Centered Dominant Logic</td></tr><tr><td>Primary unit of exchange</td><td>People exchange for goods. These goods serve primarily as operand resources.</td><td>People exchange to acquire the benefits of specialized competences (knowledge and skills), or services. Knowledge and skills are operant resources.</td></tr><tr><td>Role of goods</td><td>Goods are operand resources and end products. Marketers take matter and change its form, place, time, and possession.</td><td>Goods are transmitters of operant resources (embedded knowledge); they are intermediate &quot;products&quot; that are used by other operant resources (customers) as appliances in value- creation processes.</td></tr><tr><td>Role of customer Determination and meaning of value</td><td>The customer is the recipient of goods. Marketers do things to customers; they segment them, penetrate them, distribute to them, and promote to them. The customer is an operand resource.</td><td>The customer is a coproducer of service. Marketing is a process of doing things in interaction with the customer. The customer is primarily an operant resource, only functioning occasionally as an operand resource.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Value is determined by the producer. It is embedded in the operand resource (goods) and is defined in terms of exchange-value.</td><td>Value is perceived and determined by the consumer on the basis of &quot;value in use.&quot; Value results from the beneficial application of operant resources sometimes transmitted through operand resources. Firms can only make value propositions.</td></tr><tr><td>Firm-customer interaction</td><td>The customer is an operand resource. Customers are acted on to create transactions with resources.</td><td>The customer is primarily an operant resource. Customers are active participants in relational exchanges and coproduction.</td></tr><tr><td>Source of economic growth</td><td>Wealth is obtained from surplus tangible resources and goods. Wealth consists of owning, controlling, and producing operand resources.</td><td>Wealth is obtained through the application and exchange of specialized knowledge and skills. It represents the right to the future use of operant resources.</td></tr></table>

Therefore, value was considered the comparative appreciation of reciprocal skills or services that are exchanged to obtain utility; value meant "value in use." As Mill (1929) did, Bastiat recognized that by using their skills (operant resources), humans could only transform matter (operand resources) into a state from which they could satisfy their desires.

However, the narrower focus on the tangible output with exchange value had several advantages for the early economists' quest of turning economic philosophy into an economic science, not the least of which was economics' similarity to the subject matter of the archetypical science of the day: Newtonian mechanics. The treatment of value as embedded utility, or value added (exchange value), enabled economists (e.g., Marshall 1927; Walras 1954) to ignore both the application of mental and physical skills (services) that transformed matter into a potentially useful state and the actual usefulness as perceived by the consumer (value in use). Thus, economics evolved into the science of matter (tangible goods) that is embedded with utility, as a result of manufacturing, and has value in exchange.

It was from this manufacturing-based view of economics that marketing emerged 100 years later. Throughout the period that marketing was primarily concerned with the distribution of physical goods, the goods-centered model was probably adequate. However, as the focus of marketing moved away from distribution and toward the process of exchange, economists began to perceive the accepted idea of marketing adding time, place, and possession utility (Weld
