> 来源：Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch)\Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing (Stephen L. Vargo and Robert F. Lusch).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## FP6: The Customer Is Always a Coproducer

From the traditional, goods-based, manufacturing perspective, the producer and consumer are usually viewed as ideally separated in order to enable maximum manufacturing efficiency. However, if the normative goal of marketing is customer responsiveness, this manufacturing efficiency comes at the expense of marketing efficiency and effectiveness. From a service-centered view of marketing with a heavy focus on continuous processes, the consumer is always involved in the production of value. Even with tangible goods, production does not end with the manufacturing process; production is an intermediary process. As we have noted, goods are appliances that provide services for and in conjunction with the consumer. However, for these services to be delivered, the customer still must learn to use, maintain, repair, and adapt the appliance to his or her unique needs, usage situation, and behaviors. In summary, in using a product, the customer is continuing the marketing, consumption, and value-creation and delivery processes.

Increasingly, both marketing practitioners and academics are shifting toward a continuous-process perspective, in which separation of production and consumption is not a normative goal, and toward a recognition of the advantages, if not the necessity, of viewing the consumer as a coproducer. Among academics, Normann and Ramirez (1993, p. 69) state that "the key to creating value is to coproduce offerings that mobilize customers." Lusch, Brown, and Brunswick (1992) provide a general model to explain how much of the coproduction or service provision the customer will perform. Oliver, Rust, and Varki (1998) echo and extend the idea of coproduction in their suggestion that marketing is headed toward a paradigm of "real-time" marketing, which integrates mass customization and relationship marketing by interactively designing evolving offerings that meet customers' unique, changing needs. Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2000) note that the market has become a venue for proactive customer involvement, and they argue for co-opting customer involvement in the value-creation process. In summary, the customer becomes primarily an operant resource (coproducer) rather than an operand resource ("target") and can be involved in the entire value and service chain in acting on operand resources.
