> 来源：Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928-1931 (Sheila Fitzpatrick)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928-1931 (Sheila Fitzpatrick)\Cultural Revolution in Russia, 1928-1931 (Sheila Fitzpatrick).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Rural Scholars and the Cultural Revolution

Susan Gross Solomon

The intellectual and social pluralism that had characterized Soviet cultural life in the 192os was brought to an end by the so-called cultural revolution or the seizure of power in culture by "proletarian" intellectuals, which began in late · 1928. 1 When the revolution had spent its force less than four years later, Soviet cultural life bore but a superficial resemblance to what it had been for most of the NEP period. The cultural institutions that had enjoyed a fair measure of autonomy in the administration and conduct of their work were firmly under the control of the Party. The intellectual community had been purged of many of its most brilliant members, non-Party and Party alike; these men had been replaced by individuals whose names were on the whole unknown in the arts and scholarship. And the content of most fields of culture had been radically altered; traditional concerns now deemed "counterrevolutionary" were set aside in favor of new preoccupations·that fit the Party's definition of truth and beauty.

Among Western students of Soviet history, it has been customary to regard the cultural revolution of 1928-31 as imposed from above, brought about primarily by the intervention of the Communist party in the conduct of the arts and scholarship.2 According to this view, there were important debates within the cultural professions in the 192os, but the fundamental hostility in Soviet cultural life in the NEP period was that between the cultural professions, which were struggling to preserve their autonomy, and the Communist party, which was gradually extending its hegemony over every sphere of Soviet life. The proponents of this view have contened that at he of the wieshe Party hange acti, , as David Joravsky has put it, "from fostering to forcing."3 From 1928 on, the Party bent every effort to control culture and, in the face of such intense political pressure, the intelligentsia capitulated.

This traditional view has recently been challenged by Sheila Fitzpatrick. On the basis of her research on the politics of Soviet literature and education in the NEP period, Fitzpatrick suggests that much of the initial impetus for the harnessing of the cultural professions came from below, that is "from within the lower ranks of the party, the Komsomol, and Communist vigilante groups such as the proletarian writers and the militant atheists (Militant Godless)." In developing this idea, Fitzpatrick draws attention to the conflicts between "bourgeois" and "proletarian" intellectuals that divided the cultural professions throughout the 192os. According to her, these conflicts were bitter because, more often than not, divergent political commitments were overlaid with differences in the professional standing and orientation of the disputants; in many a profession, young Communist intellectuals new to their field and somewhat ambivalent about its norms found themselves subordinate to non-Communist intellectuals who occupied the most important posts and who regarded themselves as the guardians of professional standards.5 In Fitzpatrick's view, the in-fighting within the cultural professions was inherently explosive. It was contained in the pre-1928 period only because the Party discouraged the escalation of conflict; as soon as the Party ceased its policy of active discouragement in 1928, the young Communist intellectuals, aggrieved because of their inferior status and position, converted the conflicts into open warfare. Fitzpatrick does not deny the importance of the Party's intervention in cultural life at the end of the twenties, but she places primary emphasis on the tensions that existed within the professions prior to that intervention.

At first glance, the difference between the traditional and the new interpretations of the cultural revolution appears to be one of emphasis. Both interpretations accord some importance to the factors of Party intervention and professional in-fighting; the two accounts differ only over the weight assigned each factor. Further reflection suggests, however, that the difference between the two accounts goes far beyond the question of accent. It is rooted in a fundamental disagreement over the cohesion of the cultural professions in the NEp period. The traditional view seems to assume that the intellectuals who were engaged in the disputes were united by a feeling of professional solidarity that transcended their expressed differences. The new view, on the other hand, implies that the cleavages that gave rise to the intraprofessional disputes were so basic as to outweigh the tendency to professional solidarity. The disagreement on this point is an important one, for it raises the more general question of the viability of the NEP experiment in culture. The more recent interpretation of the events of 1928-31 would suggest that the coexistence of social and intellectual opposites, which was the hallmark of Soviet cultural life in the twenties, was so uneasy that some sort of crisis in culture was likely. The traditional view would imply that the NEP experiment in cultural pluralism did have some chance of success because within the intellectual community there was a sense of solidarity that overrode particular disputes.

Further examination of these important issues would require detailed studies of the controversies that divided intellectuals working in various fields in the 192os. Optimally, such studies would have a dual focus. First, they would analyze the patterns of cleavage in a cultural profession. How did those working in the field divide according to intellectual position, social profile, professional orientation, institutional affiliation, and political commitments? Were the cleavages overlapping or cross-cutting? And second, the studies would examine the cohesion among intellectuals working in a field. How much substantive consensus was there? On what factors was this consensus based (agreement on theory, method, important questions, criteria of good work)? How much social solidarity was there in the profession? Were the disputants loyal only to their subgroups or did they demonstrate some allegiance to the profession as a whole? What were the bases of solidarity (institutional affiliation, distribution of power and authority among intellectuals, shared professional norms, training)?

The assessment of the intellectual in-fighting within a range of cultural professions is well beyond the scope of any single paper. Here we examine in detail the controversy that divided intellectuals working in one field of scholarship—rural social studies.6

## RURAL SOCIAL STUDIES IN THE 1920s

In the first decade of Soviet power, the field of rural studies was the scene of great activity. There had been research on the Russian countryside as early as the last two decades of the nineteenth century,'7 but the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 brought with it unprecedented interest in the rural sector, upon which depended not only the economic prosperity but also the political stability of the new regime. With the Soviet government now assuming the role of patron and client of all the sciences, the field of rural inquiry burgeoned. New teaching and research centers were founded, new journals were created, and talented young people were recruited.

As the field grew, its intellectual content broadened. In the first half of the 19zos (as in the previous decade), the most vital area of rural inquiry was agricultural economics. At mid-decade, the field expanded to include questions characteristic of rural sociology.8 The intellectual growth of rural inquiry was accompanied by its institutional development. For most of the 192os the center of the rural studies profession was the Timiriazev Agricultural Academy.9 With this venerable institution, founded in 1865 on the Petrovsko-Razumovskoe estate outside Moscow, were affiliated a majority of the scholars interested in the study of the Russian countryside. In the course of the 192os, the Academy expanded its teaching and research activities. It undertook an active policy of recruiting students, so that by mid-decade it was able to boast an enrollment of three thousand undergraduate and graduate students—a figure that made it the largest such institution in all of Europe. 10 Two new research institutes were created within the Academy, one on soil science and the other on agricultural economics. 11 The latter, whose full title was the Scientific Research Institute on Agricultural Economics (Nauchnoissledovatel'skii institut sel'skokhoziaistvennoi ekonomii), was responsible for some of the most creative projects undertaken during the NEP period. 12 Despite its prerevolutionary origins and its largely non-Marxist faculty, the Timiriazev Academy had close relations with the Soviet government. 13 The Institute on Agricultural Economics served as the research arm of the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Academy's journal, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, was published in conjunction with that Ministry.14 At the end of 1925 a second center for research on the rural sector came into being. In keeping with the regime's new emphasis on the creation of institutions in which a Marxist science of society could be forged, 15 the Communist Academy opened the doors of its Agrarian Section. 16 Within but a few years of its creation, this Section became the most significant center for Marxist research on the rural sector and as such constituted a genuine alternative to the Timiriazev Academy and its institutes. 17

The scholarship produced in these institutions was well known for its quality both inside and outside Russia. Because rural inquiry was totally state-supported and because the countryside was a major concern of practical policy, the rural scholars' choice of problems for study was often influenced by governmental policy commitments. This did not mean that the studies produced were simply apologies for official policy; in fact, in the period 192 129, the instances in which a scholar adjusted his findings to support the substance of Party policy were exceedingly rare. 18

For the scholars engaged in the study of the Soviet rural sector, the decade of the 192os was a turbulent one. Between 1923 and mid-1928 the field was rent by a scientific controversy. The participants in the dispute were divided into two groups: the members of the Organization-Production school (organizatsionno-produktivnaia shkola) and the Agrarian-Marxists (agrarniky-Marksisty). Though part of a single profession, these two groups were remarkably dissimilar: their members differed from one another in age, professional standing, attitude toward scholarship, intellectual preoccupations, and political sympathies. For most of the decade, the Organization-Production scholars were the undisputed leaders of the field. 19 Agricultural economists of some distinction, these men held major posts in the Timiriazev Academy well before 1917. The Organization-Production scholars were not Marxists by conviction nor did they become members of the Communist party after the Revolution, 20 yet they continued to teach and conduct research in the Timiriazev Academy throughout the 192os, thus taking a leading role in the training of the first generation of Soviet agricultural specialists. Led by A. V. Chaianov,21 the youngest member of the group, these scholars were among the principal contributors to the Timiriazev Academy's journal and to the series of research reports (trudy) issued by the Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics. The attitude of the members of the Chaianov group toward their work was that of "cosmopolitans."22 Anxious to preserve their reputations for excellence outside as well as inside Russia, they exchanged research findings on a regular basis with foreign colleagues whom they treated as an important reference group. The second set of scholars, the Agrarian-Marxists, were younger rural sociologists. With the exception of their leader, L. N. Kritsman,23 the members of this group came to maturity after the Revolution. 24 In the first half of the 192os, they were still doing graduate work in the Timiriazev Academy, where they studied with and worked as research assistants to the members of the Organization-Production school. The Agrarian-Marxists' careers began effectively at the end of 1925, when they joined the newly created Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy. 25 Here they became involved in editing the section's journal, Na agrarnom fronte, 26 and in conducting research on peasant social structure. For this research, the members of the Kritsman group soon acquired reputations in Russia as the foremost Marxist students of the countryside. In the main, the attitude of these young researchers toward their work was that of "locals."27 Unlike their teachers, they evinced little interest in securing recognition from colleagues abroad.

Even after the controversy was resolved in mid-1928, there was no peace for the scholars engaged in rural studies. Beginning in late 1928 the field was engulfed by the cultural revolution. Within short order, Marxist credentials became a prerequisite for any scholar who proposed to do research on the Soviet countryside. And the Party was established as the final arbiter of truth in rural studies. 28 As a consequence of these developments, the most productive period in the history of Soviet rural inquiry came to a close.

For a consideration of the problems in Soviet history raised at the outset of this article, the case of rural studies has a major advantage. Within the course of a single decade, the field experienced both a protracted internal controversy and the direct intervention of the Communist party in the conduct of inquiry. This combination of events enables one to assess the relative impact upon the fate of rural inquiry of the factors of professional in-fighting and political intervention.

## THE CONTROVERSY: 1923 T0 MID-1928

The controversy between the Organization-Production and Agrarian-Marxist scholars took place in two distinct stages. The first lasted from 1923 to early 1927; the second began in early 1927 and ended in mid-1928 with the resolution of the dispute. Both the issues and the conduct of the disputants varied considerably from the first to the second stage.

## The First Stage: 192327

In the first phase of the controversy, the two groups of scholars were engaged in a dispute over the goals for their field. They differed primarily over the ranking of research questions; each school considered its own work primary and that of its rival peripheral.

Throughout their existence as a distinct school of inquiry, the Organization-Production scholars focussed their attention on the Russian family farm (trudovoe khoziaistvo), a commodity-producing economic unit that functioned without benefit of hired labor. They were interested in explaining the operation of this form of farming, which, according to their estimate, constituted 9o percent of Russian agriculture; and they were concerned with devising methods of streamlining the farm's activities.

This mixture of theoretical and practical objectives that characterized Organization-Production work in agricultural economics had its origins in the early work experiences of the members of this group. During the first decade and a half of the twentieth century, most of the Organization-Production scholars were employed as agronomists by the zemstva. 29 Their work in the villages of Russia shaped their social philosophy and defined their intellectual interests. Having witnessed at first hand the limited success of the Stolypin Land Reforms of 1906-10, they became convinced that the redistribution of land would not in itself alleviate agricultural backwardness. What was needed was the thoroughgoing reorganization of farming—the intensification of production, the introduction of complex machinery, and the relegation of certain farm tasks to the rural cooperatives. Such reorganization could not be legislated from above, they insisted;it could be effected only by slow and patient work with the peasantry. Thus it was that these men saw agronomy rather than politics as the means to rural improvement. They demanded of the agronomy in which they placed their faith that it be "scientific," founded on a precise understanding of the principles underlying the organization of agriculture and the behavior of the peasant farmer. Their own observations of peasant life reinforced by the comments of other agricultural officials led them to suspect that the predominant form of agriculture in Russia, the family farm, was an unusual economic unit whose springs of action remained to be discovered. To accomplish this important task, the agronomists turned from practical careers to the full-time study of the family farm.

The Organization-Production scholars approached their subject as microeconomists. They focussed on the internal dynamics of the family farm and paid no attention—at least initially—to the relation of that farm to the rural sector as a whole. 30 In defense of this focus, the members of the Chaianov group argued that without the study of the operation of the individual farm, all research on the countryside would be superficial. 31 Their explanation of the dynamics of the family farm began with an analysis of the psychology of the family farmer. The head of the family farm, so ran the theory, was not acquisitive by nature; he was interested only in satisfying the consumption needs of the members of his family. The pursuit of this objective led the farmer to behave in an unusual way. Until his family's needs were met he would work, often laboring well past the point of diminishing marginal returns; as soon as his family's needs were met, however, the farmer would cease his labors irrespective of the prospects for additional gain. 32 The Organization-Production account of the activity of the family farm was essentially a demographic one. "Consumption pressure," the variable identified as determining the economic activity of the farm, was defined by the members of the Chaianov group as the ratio of consumers to workers in the farming family and was declared to vary in accordance with the age (number of years in existence) of the family unit. 33 All differences in the economic activity between farms were attributed to variations in family composition; no mention was made of the inequities in the distribution of resources or talents. 34

By 1915 the rudiments of the demographic explanation had been presented. For the next decade, the Organization-Production scholars concentrated their energies on examining every aspect of the farm they had described. They charted the organization of the family farm by studying its resource budget; they explored the effects on the family farm of its participation in rural cooperatives; they isolated the principles underlying the farmer's calculation of the optimum size and patterns of cultivation for his farm; and they traced the evolution of Russian agriculture by examining farming in widely different regions. 35 The results of their research persuaded these men that some of the most important categories of classical economics (wages, profit, rent) could not be meaningfully applied to the operation of the small-scale independent farm. Codifying their observations in 1924, the Organization-Production scholars presented an explanation of the dynamics of the family farm, which they daringly entitled a "theory of non-capitalist economics. "36

The Agrarian-Marxists brought to rural studies a set of concerns that differed substantially from those of their mentors. They concentrated on the economic and social stratification of the peasantry, insisting that only through an analysis of peasant social structure could the evolution of the rural sector be laid bare. As Marxists, they started from the premise that the Soviet peasantry was in the process of evolving to socialism and they devoted their efforts to studying the pattern of that evolution.

In approaching their subject, the members of the Kritsman group were influenced by the fact that they were the first generation of Soviet Marxists to study the Russian countryside. Responding to what they perceived as the demands of this unique position, the young researchers began their work with the declaration that all previous Marxist thinking about the transition of the rural sector to socialism was inappropriate under Soviet conditions. 37 In taking this stand, the group's principal target was the theory, espoused by Western and late nineteenth-century Russian Marxists alike, that on its route to socialism the peasantry had to pass through the stage of capitalism. 38 The Agrarian-Marxists conceded that this law was valid when applied to the countries of Western Europe or even to their own Russia before 1917, but they termed it "outmoded" in a setting in which political power was in the hands of the proletariat.

In place of the Marxist formulations of the past, the Agrarian-Marxists substituted a new theory whose rudiments they extracted from Lenin's last writings. 39 They contended that "under the dictatorship of the proletariat" there were two possible routes to socialism. In addition to the traditional capitalist route, the peasantry could now evolve to socialism via the rural cooperatives; the small and middle peasants could join the rural cooperatives and, as members of these large-scale, horizontally organized institutions, could engage in the struggle with capitalist agriculture. Of the two paths to socialism, the Agrarian-Marxists preferred the cooperative route for a variety of reasons. In their view, the cooperative path would promote the development of a homogeneous economy. Instead of the immediate emergence of socialism in industry, with agriculture moving first to capitalism and then to socialism, the cooperative route would permit both sectors of the economy to develop in tandem. Further, the cooperative route would effect with minimum social cost the dissolution of the major obstacle to socialism, the precapitalist (read "independent") peasantry; now for the first time, the small and middle peasant could avoid the agonies of an unequal contest with the rural capitalist and the almost certain proletrianizaton hat would issue fm that contet.And finaly, evey existence of the cooperative option would testify to the originality—and greatness—of the Soviet experiment.

Their partisanship on behalf of the cooperative pattern did not blind the Agrarian-Marxists to the difficulties that would attend its implementation. While asserting that the hegemony of the proletariat had increased the number of possible paths to socialism, the Agrarian-Marxists admitted that the actual choice of path was dependent upon peasant ttitudes toward farming. With this factor in mind, the young researchers predicted that in the initial phase of the dictatorship of the proletariat, both paths to socialism would be pursued. While some peasants would choose to enter the cooperatives, others, victims of the traditional attachment to individual farming, would stubbornly cling to their tiny plots and thus contribute to the capitalization of the rural sector. But, insisted the Agrarian-Marxists, as more and more peasants became disillusioned about their prospects of becoming large-scale landowners, they would join the cooperatives, and thus the new route would gradually gain ascendancy over the old.40

In its first phase, the controversy between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups was conducted in moderate tones. Each group devoted its efforts to enunciating its own theory and to pursuing those research projects that it deemed consequential. Serious intellectual criticism of either group by the other was rare; when criticisms were launched, they tended to be directed at particular points rather than at the opponent's position as a whole. Social relations between the two schools in this period appear to have have been most cordial. The two groups met frequently, as both were housed in the Timiriazev Academy, and there is no record of any hostile or acrimonious confrontation. Even more revealing, these years saw the initiation of several large-scale research projects that involved the collaboration of members of both schools.41

Though not the predominant concern of either school, the dispute over the goals for the field tacitly influenced the research of both. The continued insistence of their students upon the importance of studying interfarm relations eventually led the Chaianov group to move into the arena of "macroeconomics" and to examine the relation of the family farm to the larger rural sector. On the basis of their examination, in 1925 the Organization-Production scholars declared that the unique properties of the family farm to which they had earlier drawn attention would permit the small-scale farm to withstand the process of rural capitalization; indeed, they asserted, over time there would take place a marked transfer of lands from capitalist to family farming. 42 The implications of this position were clear: the Soviet rural sector would not evolve to capitalism, but would for the foreseeable future remain dependent upon the small commodity producer. At the prospect of such a future, the Organization-Production scholars were not at all dismayed. In their view, the family farm—its activity rationalized as a result of the performance of some of its functions by the vertically organized cooperatives43—was well suited to serve as the basis of a modern agricultural sector. At about the same time that the Organization-Production scholars concluded that the countryside was not evolving to capitalism, the Agrarian-Marxists modified their original stand with the declaration that the Soviet peasantry was adopting the capitalist path to socialism. The primary reason for this modification was cognitive. When the young researchers turned to study the rural sector, they were confronted with a glaring disparity between the postulates of their theory and actual conditions in the Soviet countryside. Specifically, even their most cautious prediction about the gradual drift of the poor and middle peasants to the cooperatives was proving over-optimistic; the data they colleced showe cearly that the lower stratfthe peasants were clingng resolutely to their small allotments and that the cooperatives were being used by the better-off peasants for their own purposes. \* Faced with this reality, the Agrarian-Marxists effected a compromise. They did not repudiate the propositions of the theory they had espoused. They simply structured their research around the hypothesis that the Soviet peasantry was pursuing the capitalist path to socialism; they undertook extensive studies of rural social structure using indicators designed to detect the growing capitalization of the peasantry.4s This compromise, which had been hammered out by 1926, had two advanitages: it allowed the Agrarian-Marxists to conduct empirical inquiry on problems they considered important; and it served to differentiate the young researchers from their mentors and thus constituted an important stage in the Kritsman group's drive to carve a place for itself in the community of Soviet rural scholars.

## The Second Stage: 1927 to mid-1928

In the second stage of the controversy, the issues dividing the two schools underwent an important change. The new phase began in early 1927 when the Chaianov and Kritsman groups met in the Timiriazev Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics to debate the question of rural differentiation.46 The two groups of scholars came to the meeting with widely divergent views of differentiation in Soviet Russia—its nature, its causes, and its effects on peasant society.

The Agrarian-Marxists considered the most important differences among the peasantry to be social in nature and economic in origin. Beginning with the fact that the means of cultivation were in short supply and were unevenly distributed in the rural sector, the researchers showed that the existence of these inequities generated webs of hire-and-lease transactions, whose objects ranged from inventory and livestock to the land itself. By virtue of these transactions some peasants became dependent upon others for the means of their existence. Thus arose the social relations of subordination and superordination, which, to the members of the Kritsman group, constituted the essence of rural differentiation. According to the young researchers, the process of differentiation would end by transforming the rural sector. The peasantry would become increasingly stratified until the rural population was polarized into two groups: rural capitalists and agricultural wage-workers. The middle, precapitalist peasant would be resolved into one or the other—usually the latter—of the two groups and with him would disappear traditional peasant society.

The Organization-Production scholars took a very different position. They considered the salient variations between peasant farms to be demographic in origin. According to them, the economic activity of each farm was a function of the ratio of consumers to workers on the farm, and that ratio in turn varied with the number of years the family unit had been in existence. The demographic analysis put forward by the Chaianov group led logically to an equilibrium model of rural development. 47 Assuming that the cycle of growth and decay of each farm was determined by the composition of its family, for every farm that expanded its operation there would be another in the process of contracting its activities. Thus any net change in the map of peasant social structure was unlikely and the traditional peasant society of the small independent farmer could be expected to endure for some time.

In the course of the discussion in the Timiriazev Institute, it became clear that underlying the schools' dispute over peasant stratification was a disagreement over a more fundamental question—the nature of the Russian family farm. The Chaianov group treated the family farm as a form of biological organism with its own internally determined cycle of growth and decay; external factors were viewed as exerting minimal influence on that cycle. The Kritsman group considered the family farm to be an economic unit that, like other such units, was primarily determined by the socioeconomic environment within which it existed. To be sure, this disagreement had been latent in the schools' earlier divergence over the capitalization of the rural sector. But now the issue of the family farm came to the fore, eclipsing all other points of difference between the two groups. Indeed, from early 1927 on, the controversy in rural inquiry was no longer a disagreement over goals; it had become a dispute on a single point of substance.

The emergence of the issue of the family farm as the center of the rural studies controversy was related to certain shifts of emphasis in the rural policy of the Communist party. Until 1926 the regime courted the individual peasant on the theory that the good will of this figure was necessary, as Soviet agriculture would continue for some time to be based on smallscale units of production. Even the long-range plans for the rural sector drafted during this period reflected this assumption.8 After 1925, however, there was much less emphasis on conciliating the individual peasant. As the Party began to face the challenge of constructing socialism, calls were issued for the strengthening of the large-scale socialist farm sector and for the expansion of the role of the rural cooperatives. At about the same time, the deficiencies inherent in small-scale farming were becoming increasingly apparent. This confluence of events highlighted the question of the future of the family farm. That the rural scholars were aware of the urgency of that question was clear from the discussion at the Timiriazev meeting.

In addition to the shift in the issues dividing the scholarly community, in the second phase of the controversy there was a noticeable change in the conduct of the disputants. As of 1927, the dispute began to consume most of the energies of the scholars. There was a decrease in the attention devoted by each group to its own work and a corresponding rise in the amount of notice given by each to the research of the other. The intensified scrutiny varied in form. The Agrarian-Marxist scholars conducted a root-and-branch attack upon the Organization-Production position. They undertook extensive research designed to disprove the core propositions enunciated by their teachers5o and they attempted to challenge the hegemony of the Chaianov group over certain fields of inquiry by proposing alternative approaches to questions traditionally studied by the Timiriazev professors.s1 For their part, the Organization-Production scholars became defensive. They attempted to minimize the novelty of their work on the family farm by drawing links between it and the work done by their students, 2 and they worked to reformulate their research so that it would be relevant to the current concerns of the regime. 3 They did not, however, retract any of their core beliefs or assertions. As each of the schools increased its criticism of the scholarship of the other, social relations between the two groups became strained. Collaboration ceased and it became rare for members of one group to acknowledge with sincerity their intellectual debts to their rivals. 54

Probably several factors influenced the change in conduct. The Agrarian-Marxists' decision to read and criticize their rivals' work with care was taken primarily in response to the extension of Organization-Production theory into the arena of "macroeconomics". As of 1925, the Timiriazev professors were claiming to have unlocked the secrets of the entire rural sector. Confronted with this sweeping claim, the Kritsman group realized that piecemeal criticism was useless; to best their mentors, the young researchers would have to cast doubt upon at least some of the basic postulates of Organization-Production theory and propose an alternative account of the phenomena explained by the Chaianov group. The Organization-Production scholars were influenced in their decision to adopt a defensive strategy by the shifts in rural policy described above. The extent to which their intellectual position was out of tune with the commitments of the new age was not lost upon these scholars. Concerned lest they lose their status as experts on Soviet agriculture, the members of the Chaianov group began to deflect attention from their work on the family farm and to present their research wherever possible as relevant to the new directions in rural policy.

The changes in the behavior of both sets of disputants were affected by modifications in the professional organization of the rural studies field that occurred at mid-decade. In the first half of the 192os, the Chaianov group had occupied the major posts in the most prestigious institution, with the Agrarian-Marxists filling the subordinate positions. The founding of the Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy and the move by the Agrarian-Marxists to this new section in 1926 altered the balance of power in the rural studies community. Now the young researchers had the independence they needed to launch a full-scale critique of their teachers and the Chaianov group had to adopt a more cautious line, for it no longer exercised undisputed control over the field. Not only did the new professional organization of the field affect the rivals' intellectual conduct, it also influenced their social behavior. The move by the Agrarian-Marxists to the Agrarian Section brought to an end both the teacher-student relations that had been responsible for the cordiality of the earlier period and the collaborative research that had inhibited the levelling of unrestrained criticism by one school against the other.

## Resolution: Spring to Autumn 1928

Between the early spring and the autumn of 1928 the controversy that had divided the rural studies community for over half a decade was resolved. The end came quietly, with no fanfare. The Organization-Production scholars ceased doing research on the family farm and began to study the organization of large-scale state and collective farms.s For scholars who had been so convinced of the merits of small-scale independent farms and so skeptical of the viability of large-scale socialist agricultur,the hit  this ewtitiu a volte  Indeitt aside their traditional interests for new concerns, the members of the Chaianov group were effectively conceding that the small noncapitalist farm would not play the role in Soviet agriculture that they had envisaged for it.

The concession by the Chaianov group is open to two very different interpretations. The Organization-Production scholars may have been prompted to alter their research focus primarily because of the tense atmosphere that surrounded the Shakhty trial. The trial of the Shakhty engineers took place in May 1928, but beginning in March of that year extensive publicity was given to the "treason" of the "bourgeois" specialists. 57 It is possible that the Organization-Production scholars conceded their position because they anticipated that, as a consequence of the Shakhty trial, the distrust of non-Communist specialists would spread to those working in cultural fields.s8 Alternatively, it may well have been that the Organization-Production scholars shifted their research focus largely. in response to the Party's patent disenchantment with small-scale farming and its growing emphasis on large-scale agriculture as reflected in the resolution passed at the Fifteenth Party Congress enjoining "the gradual transformation of individual peasant holdings into large-scale farming enterprises."59

Our evidence suggests that the latter explanation is more appropriate than the former. In mid-1928 the members of the Chaianov group do not appear to have foreseen the suspicion of all bourgeois specialists that followed in the wake of the Shakhty trial. In their studies of socialist agriculture written during the year 1928, the Timiriazev professors made no attempt to style themselves as "proletarian" scholars. Instead, they presented themselves as apolitical experts whose skills were technical and therefore applicable in any political context;6% only later did the members of the Chaianov group attempt to jump aboard the political bandwagon. But in mid-1928 the Organization-Production scholars do seem to have perceived that, as a consequence of their identification with the study of the family farm, their status as experts on Soviet agriculture was in jeopardy. That they looked upon their new work as a means to avert obsolescence was clear from the fact that wherever possible they drew attention to the relevance of their current research for the concerns of the regime. In our view, therefore, the concession of mid-1928 should be interpreted mainly as an intensification of the quest for relevance begun by the Chaianov group in the second phase of the controversy.

## RURAL INQUIRY AND THE CULTURAL REVOLUTION: 1928-31

In the second half of 1928, almost as soon as the controversy was resolved, the field of rural inquiry began to feel the impact of the cultural revolution. That revolution affected every aspect of the field--the administration and structure of the major teaching and research institutions, the composition of the scholarly community, and the content of theory and research on the countryside.

The first signs of the change occurred in the professional organization of the field. In September 1928, the Agrarian Section of the Communist Academy was raised to the status of an institute. 61 Officially, the change was made in recognition of the achievements of the section in the study of rural social structure. More likely, the change reflected the Party's understanding that for the hegemony of Marxist theory to be established in rural studies (as per the charge to the Communist Academy of May 1928), 62 the Kritsman group would require additional stature. At about the same time, the Timiriazev Academy was reorganized. In June 1928, a new director, M. E. Shefler, was installed. 63 Shefler, a member of the Communist party since 1917, waited only a month after his appointment before criticizing the workings of the Academy at a session of the collegia of the Commissariats of Agriculture and Enlightenment. 64 Shefler's attack culminated in the drawing up of a five-year plan for the revamping of the academy. For our story, the important aspect of the projected change was the planned bifurcation of the economics faculty into a faculty of state farms and a faculty of collective farms. With the implementation of this change, there would no longer be any faculty in which courses on presocialist (read "family") farming could be mounted. Thus the Organization-Production scholars, who had always done their .teaching in the economics faculty, would be deprived of their pied à terre. In the last third of 1928 the reorganization of the academy took effect. It was followed closely by an attack on the research institution dominated by the Chaianov group, the Institute on Agricultural Economics. In February 1929, a proposal was made in the Presidium of Ranon to integrate that institute with the Institute on Land Consolidation and Migration.65 The clear purpose behind the proposal was to ease the Chaianov group out without having to close down its institute.

The changes in the professional organization of rural studies were followed almost immediately by alterations in the composition of the community of scholars. These alterations stemmed from the implementation of a policy that required any researcher studying the Soviet countryside to possess credentials as a Marxist. As might have been expected, the first victims of this unwritten rule were the Timiriazev professors. As they became aware of the new policy of "credentialism,"66 the members of the Chaianov group attempted to retain their positions by "confessing" their errors and pledging to conduct rural inquiry along Marxist lines. 67 Initially, these "confessions" were accepted at face value. However, as the leaders of the Organization-Production school proved unable to adjust their work to the official view of the rural sector, the genuiness of their confessions was called into question by Party officials working in agricultural science, and the repentant authors were denounced. 68 Restrained, monitored, and vilified, the members of the Chaianov group retreated one by one from the field they had once led. By the end of 1929 they had disappeared as a force in rural inquiry. And, Puti sel'skogo khoziaistva, the journal in which these scholars had published their most important articles, was replaced by a new journal entitled Sotsialisticheskaia rekonstruktsia i sel'skoe khoziaistvo, which devoted little space to agricultural policy and even less to articles on agricultural economics. 69 For some zealots, the elimination of the Organization-Production scholars from the field was apparently insufficient. For in 193o the leaders of the school were arrested on the charge (never proven) that they had formed an opposition political party, the Working Peasant Party. 70

The emphasis on credentials that had led to the elimination of the Organization-Production scholars from rural studies took its toll on the Agrarian-Marxists as well. At the Conference of Marxist-Leninist Scientific Research Institutions held in April of 1929, the Kritsman group found itself facing two charges levelled against them by scholars boasting superior credentials as Marxists.71 First the attackers claimed that the Kritsman group had allowed the Timiriazev professors to define its Marxism for it. The irony of this charge was bitter. For over half a decade, the Agrarian-

Marxists had staunchly battled their teachers in the name of Marxism; now that the Timiriazev professors no longer constituted a threat, that very service was being turned against Kritsman and his followers. To be sure, there was a grain of truth in the accusation. The Agrarian-Marxists had shaped their research in part with a view to refuting their teachers' contention that the rural sector was not evolving to capitalism. Equally important, the Kritsman group had not dismissed out of hand the work of its rivals. In fact, in October 1929—half a year after the April attack—a member of the Kritsman school drew up a proposal for a course in rural studies in which all the major writings of the Timiriazev professors were included as suggested (rather than required) readings. 72 The second accusation directed against the group in the Agrarian Institute was that their views contradicted Party policy on the countryside. In particular, the critics cited the failure of the Kritsman group to discuss the virtues of cooperative agriculture. Rhetoric notwithstanding, the doctrinal element in the April attack was minimal. More than anything else, the attack was a reflection of the struggle for power and prestige that was taking shape within the community of Marxist rural scholars.

With the Organization-Production scholars removed from the field and the Agrarian-Marxists under fire, the stage was set for the last act in the drama—the establishment of the Party as the final arbiter of truth in rural studies. In December 1929, the First All-Union Conference of Agrarian-Marxists convened in Moscow.73 This Conference, which was the analogue of a similar meeting of Soviet historians held the previous year, brought together some three hundred delegates from all over the Soviet Union. The official purpose of the conference was to foster links between the scholars working at the Agrarian Institute of the Communist Academy in Moscow and Marxist researchers working on the periphery. The evidence suggests, however, that its real aim was to solidify the control of the Agrarian Institute staff over the field of rural studies. In preparation for the December meeting, scholars from the Moscow Institute were sent out to "advise" in the selection of delegates from outlying regions. 74 And no less revealing, well in advance of the conference the members of the institute were designated as the leaders of an All-Union Society of Agrarian-Marxists whose formation was to be announced at the December meeting. 75

The seven-day conference opened on December  against the background of an intensive campaign to make full-scale collectivization an immediate reality. Yet the subject of collectivization did not dominate the meeting. 76 Rather, the sessions were taken up with intricate disputes over credentials. Day after day, the scholar-delegates debated the question of who in the community of rural researchers could be considered an orthodox Marxist. 77

In these discussions over credentials, there were signs of a growing tendency to assess the value of scholarship on the basis of political criteria. But it was not until Stalin appeared to address the delegates on the seventh and final day of the meeting that the use of such criteria of assessment received official sanction. Stalin's speech to the assembled delegates began rather innocuously. The speaker reminded his audience of the importance of theory in the study of the countryside; to this, he added the notsurprising injunction that only Marxist theory be tolerated in Soviet research on the rural sector. 78 Stalin's rather bland remarks on rural studies proved to be but the prelude to the core of his address—the announcement that the kulaks or better-off peasants were to be liquidated as a class.79 The effect of Stalin's announcement was—in the words of one of the delegates—"electrifying."so Suddenly the assembled scholars understood that the discussions of the requirements for Marxist rural studies that had occupied their attention for six days were irrelevant. The final arbiter of truth in rural studies was not to be Marxist-Leninist theory as a body of doctrine, but rather the facts as created by the Communist party through its rural policy. Henceforth, the task of theory would be to celebrate those facts and the task of researchers would be to confirm the correctness of theory.

In retrospect, it is clear that the conference had its most profound impact on the members of the Kritsman group. They had come to the conference prepared to assume the responsibility for securing the hegemony of Marxist theory and research in rural studies; indeed, the transcript of the December meeting showed them eager to take on their posts of leadership in the new All-Union Society of Agrarian-Marxists. With Stalin's appearance on the seventh day of the conference, the terms of their mandate underwent important change. Now the Kritsman group was to ensure that the substance of Marxist rural inquiry was consistent with the policy of the Communist party. For this new task, the group proved itself remarkably unsuited. And consequently, like their teachers before them, the young researchers were forced to leave the field of rural studies. The saga of their departure was no less pathetic than that of their one-time rivals. In September 193o, Kritsman lost his position as editorin-chief of Na agrarnom fronte, although he did retain a seat on the editorial board. Toward the end of that year, the attacks on Kritsman and his group multiplied81 and some of his younger colleagues issued recantations. 82 The attempts to avoid censure proved futile, however. In early 1932 the entire editorial board of the journal was replaced, an action that was justified as necessary in the face of Kritsman's "anti-Leninism."83 With this act, the politicization of rural inquiry was complete.

In experiencing politicization, the field of rural studies was far from unique. In the course of the cultural revolution, most fields of social science suffered a similar fate; the fields differed from one another only in the timing and pattern of their transformation. In rural inquiry, politicization began relatively early. The reasons for this are not difficult to surmise. Most of the rural studies conducted during the 192os reflected the assumptions underlying NEp—the belief in the advantages of a transition period in which agriculture would continue to be conducted by the small commodity producer and the conviction that socioeconomic change in the countryside had to be both gradual and unforced. In late 1928, when they began to think seriously of jettisoning NEp, some Party leaders felt it necessary to harness the field of rural studies lest dissenting—and knowledgeable— voices be raised against the shift in policy. Not only did the politicization of rural inquiry begin early, it was also accomplished with relative dispatch. By early 193o the Communist party through its spokesmen was in effective control of the field. The comparatively quick takeover of rural inquiry may have been made possible in part by the controversy that divided the field from 1923 to mid-1928. The importance and lengthy duration of the debate over the family farm resulted in the polarization of the community of rural scholars. By 1928 the position of a scholar who was not affiliated with either school had become untenable.84 Moreover, the shift in the issues of the controversy from a disagreement over goals to a substantive dispute was accompanied by the narrowing of the content of the field; all research not directly related to the disputed issue was set aside as of 1927. By weakening the fabric of the intellectual community and by impoverishing the substance of the field, the controversy may have had the effect of easing the way for politicization.

The fact that the controversy of 1923 to mid-1928 may have facilitated the subsequent politicization of rural inquiry should not lead one to conclude that politicization was simply an intensification of trends already in progress. In fact, the characteristics of the cultural revolution in rural studies—the invocation of "credentialism" as the basis for excluding scholars from the conduct of research and the installation of the Party as the final arbiter of truth in the field-—were unique to the period after mid-1928. In the first decade of Soviet power, the instances in which the assessment of a work of scholarship was affected by the political allegiances of the investigator were rare. This was, after all, the period in which the Party was encouraging non-Marxist as well as Marxist scholars to engage in social inquiry.8s Moreover, in those years agreement between the findings of research and Party policy was not a requirement. To be sure, because rural studies was a field whose subject matter was of concern to practical policy, there was some premium placed on scholarship that would be "useful" in practice; however, until late 1928 "useful" work was defined as research that bore on questions of importance, not as research that supported the policy line of the Party. These conditions underwent radical change over the period 192831. For the scholars engaged in the study of the Soviet countryside, the cultural revolution constituted a real break with the past.

## CONCLUSION

Our survey of developments in the field of rural studies revealed that although the in-fighting between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups was bitter in the period prior to mid-1928, it stopped short of all-out war. What were the factors that constrained the conflict in this period? In the case of rural inquiry, there is no basis for the conclusion that it was the Party that was instrumental in discouraging the spread of conflict. Rather, the evidence suggests that the in-fighting among scholars was contained because of the existence of intellectual and social cohesion within the profession.

At first glance, it would appear that the intellectual consensus in the field was severely limited. The two schools could not agree on the content of theory, on the methods of research, or even on the ranking of problems in their area of inquiry. The extent of the disagreement between the Chaianov and Kritsman groups should not, however, obscure the fact that the contending scholars did share a common framework of discourse, a framework defined by the assumptions underlying the New Economic Policy. It was by virtue of this shared framework that the disputants talked to—rather than past—one another. So successful was the dialogue between the contending schools that at the end of the 192os the Agrarian-Marxists were accused of having internalized the perspective of their rivals!

Similarly, the social solidarity among scholars working in rural inquiry was more extensive than appearances would suggest. To be sure, the members of each school were primarily loyal to their own group, particularly as the controversy gathered force in 1927. Despite sectarian loyalties, there was evident among rural scholars of all stripes some feeling of identification with the field as a whole. Neither group sought to break away from the field in order to create a subspecialty in which its concerns would be dominant; nor did either group attempt to have the other excluded from the field.86 Rather, each school seemed to accept the other as part of its profession. There were most likely several sources of this feeling of solidarity. To begin with, for most of the 192os the field of rural studies was defined so broadly as to include all serious study of the Soviet countryside. The breadth of this definition made possible the identification of two such diverse groups with a single profession. ·But more important, the professional organization of the field in the first half of the 192os encouraged both groups to share certain norms of scholarly work and conduct. Until 1926, it will be remembered, the Agrarian-Marxists studied with and worked as research assistants to the members of the Chaianov group. It seems clear that this early training affected the young researchers profoundly. When they sought to displace their former teachers as the leaders of the rural studies community, the members of the Kritsman group did not suspend the rules of social science method or set aside their commitment to scholarship; instead, they made every effort to outdo their former mentors according to the rules of the game. The young Marxist scholars who conducted research on the rural sector did not have the uneasy relation to their profession that characterized the writers (as described by Fitzpatrick). 87 Far from being hostile to or even ambivalent about the norms of their profession, at a crucial juncture the Agrarian-Marxists demonstrated their commitment to using the established route to success. The abandonment of scholarly norms came only in 1929 with the ascendancy of new cadres of "rural scholars."

It is interesting to speculate about the sources of the difference between rural studies and literature. Some of the variation in the attitude of writers and rural scholars toward their respective professions may well have derived from dissimilarities in the socialization to which novices in the arts and social sciences were subjected. 88 One might hypothesize that there was more encouragement of and scope for originality in the field of literature than in that of rural studies. But there were other factors that contributed to the Agrarian-Marxists' allegiance to traditional norms. For one thing, the long history of the field influenced the type of novice attracted to the study of the countryside; the fact that rural inquiry had been conducted in Russia for nearly half a century discouraged the entrant who was seeking a field with a small body of knowledge that could be easily assimilated. Further, the government's acceptance of rural studies inhibited most potential rebels from overthrowing the established norms of their profession. In the period prior to mid-1928, government agencies regularly commissioned research from leading rural scholars; as we have indicated, the Timiriazev Academy's Institute on Agricultural Economics functioned as the research arm of the Ministry of Agriculture. Thus, young students in the field were educated in the belief that official recognition would be accorded those who extended, rather than destroyed, the corpus of research on the rural sector. The evidence suggests that the Agrarian-Marxists learned their lessons well.

The behavior of the Agrarian-Marxists from 1927 on leads to the conclusion that in the field of rural inquiry, the impulse for the cultural revolution did not come from within the ranks of the Communist intelligentsia. Without doubt, the members of the Kritsman group disagreed vehemently with their mentors, whom they sought to displace from positions of leadership. But the young researchers did not attempt to exclude their senior colleagues from the field. Indeed, as late as October 1929, the Agrarian-Marxists were still acknowledging the value of their teachers' contributions. In the field of rural studies, responsibility for the onset of the cultural revolution must be laid at the door of the Communist party and its minions—men with no scholarly credits but with the requisite willingness to act as ideological watchdogs over those who dared to conduct inquiry.

The fact that our case supports the traditional view of the onset of the cultural revolution should not be regarded as in any way diminishing the value of the new interpretation of the events of 1928-31. Clearly, the transformation of Soviet culture at the end of the twenties did not take place according to any single pattern. In some fields, the young Communist intellectuals chafed at the norms of their profession and therefore, at the first opportunity, converted their disagreements with their non-Marxist (or sometimes Marxist) senior colleagues into all-out war. In other fields, the in-fighting among intellectuals, however bitter, was contained because of the existence of intellectual and social cohesion within the profession; in these cases it was the intervention by the Party and its deputies that set the revolution in motion. With the variations in the development of the cultural professions under NEP an accepted fact, students of the period must now begin the task of identifying the factors that produced those variations.

Such work will, we hope, yield an understanding of the potential of the NEP experiment in culture. The facts of the rural studies case as presented here argue against the view that the coexistence of intellectual opposites under NEP was inherently unstable and that some sort of revolution in culture was therefore unavoidable. Our evidence suggests that although the rifts of 1923 to mid-1928 were serious, there was still an overriding commitment among rural scholars of all persuasions to the continuation of pluralism in the field. The Agrarian-Marxists who might have been thought most eager to eliminate their non-Communist rivals showed themselves disinclined to do so. It would appear, then, that the Agrarian-Marxists were concerned to secure for Marxism (and for their own group) a position of hegemony, not monopoly, in rural studies.

A pluralism in which Marxism was the dominant but not the only approach to social inquiry would have met many needs. It would have satisfied the desire of the regime for research that was sound and supportive; it would have iulfilled the longings of the Marxist scholars for control of their fields; and it would have preserved the diversity of the intellectual community. Regrettably, this form of pluralism was never tried. In the realm of culture, as in other realms, the limits of the NEP experiment were never reached.

# Marxist Historians during the Cultural Revolution: A Case Study of Professional In-fighting

George M. Enteen

Even to the nonspecialist, some aspects of the "cultural revolution" in the historical profession are familiar. It is well known that Pokrovskii's group of Marxist historians established its own brand of "hegemony" in the historical field, somewhat comparable to that of the proletarian association RAPP in literature (see Fitzpatrick, this volume). It is also well known that in 193 1 Stalin personally intervened in the historical debate with his letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia, and that this intervention was followed by an eventual decline in the prestige and influence of the Pokrovskii school.

From these facts alone, one might conclude that the Party leadership first selected an "instrument" for the subordination of the historical profession and later discarded it when it had served its purpose. However, it is the contention of this essay that such an explanation both simplifies and distorts the nature of the cultural revolutionary process in history. The dynamic impulse behind the 192831 upheavals in the historical profession seems to have come not only from directives and hints from above, but also from factional struggles generated within the profession. Pokrovskii, who occupied a position in the historical profession comparable

with that of Pashukanis in law (see Sharlet, this volume), faced a challenge from other Communist historians who (like Vyshinskii in the legal profession) clearly looked to the Party leadership for support in their campaign against the dominant Marxists in the profession, and partially obtained it. At the same time, almost certainly, the challengers were aided in their campaign by the resentment felt by non-Marxists and non-Communists in the profession toward the Pokrovskii group that had earlier humiliated them.

As in the case of law, the logical interest of the Party leadership was probably in conflict with theories of the dominant group of Marxist historians. Pokrovskii's theories were, after all, deterministic, cosmopolitan in spirit, and indisposed to stress the importance of exceptional individuals. But this did not supply the Party leadership with an overwhelming reason to intervene in the historical debate. So long, however, as factional conflict had not been overcome in the Party, the writing of Party history constituted a form of power. The history of the Party was too important to be left entirely in the hands of historians. In this sense the situation resembled that existing, for example, in rural studies (see Solomon, this volume), where collectivization did provide a reason for Party intervention. Although the leadership was only intermittently concerned about historical quarrels, regarding them as of secondary importance, individual members of the leadership were probably inclined to favor different historical factions. Once historians became embroiled in factional conflicts of their own and appealed to the Party leadership for support, Party leadership could not overlook political consequences and stand aloof.

The e   r Ma historians to win a mandate from the Party Central Committee to guide historical research and publication, to control the staffing of institutions, and to enforce professional norms. This constitutes a case study of infighting within a profession during the period of cultural revolution; and our view is that such a study exposes one of the basic processes of cultural revolution and provides, at the same time, important insights into the political culture of the early years of the Stalin period.

Until 1927, a modus vivendi existed between Marxist and non-Marxist historians. But it was a modus vivendi in which non-Marxists effectively dominated the profession: despite hardship resulting from the Civil War and losses through emigration, the so-called bourgeois historians continued their pursuits and retained their leadership in the traditional scholarly institutions.

The Marxist historians at first organized themselves separately, and on the periphery of the profession. Leaving the Academy of Sciences to the traditional historians, they organized their own Society of Marxist Historians under the poorer and less prestigious Communist Academy. In RANIoNl—the biggest center for historical research and graduate teaching—the faculty included only a minority of Marxists.

This was a situation of academic pluralism. But it must be remembered that pluralism was no more secure than the mood of compromise and the policy of reconstruction that had engendered nEp, and those involved viewed it as a confrontation of two camps, in which the stronger would ultimately triumph. In 1927 it was already clear that the belligerent spirit was rising. This must partly be attributed to the social and political tensions produced by the "war scare" of that year. But in the field of history, a local factor was also involved: the militance of the Marxist students. Late in 1927 a student wall newspaper in RAnon's Institute of History called for an end to "demarxification" and denigration of Lenin, and denounced the aping of Western fashions as the latest word in scholarship. A delegation appeared at the office of Pokrovski, then head of Ranon, demanding remedy of the situation. 2

Almost simultaneously with this student campaign against the "bourgeois historians" came a political fight within the party organization of the Institute of Red Professors. The students here—an extremely highly politicized group of Communists—were reacting to the first phase of the battle within the Politburo over grain procurements and the pace of industrialization. As early as February 1928, according to a Stalinist account published in 1931, the future Right Oppositionist N. A. Uglanov (then secretary of the Moscow Party Committee) had used the institute as a forum to express a warning about forcing the pace of industrialization and provoking a confrontation with the peasantry. The Party bureau of the institute supported him, but was apparently unseated in March by demonstration of rank-and-file support among Communists of the institute for the tougher line on economic policy associated with Stalin.3

In the course of 1928, an increasingly vituperative public campaign was mounted against non-Marxist historiography. The most prominent targets were D. M. Petrushevskii, a medievalist who headed the RANION Institute of History and was soon to be elected to the Academy of Sciences; Academician E. V. Tarle, a specialist in modern history who had hitherto been deemed "progressive"; and Academician S. A. Zhebelev, a specialist in ancient history.

Pokrovskii did not initiate the campaign, and at first even gave some appearance of diffidence in prosecuting it. But by the autumn of 1928, when it was already clear that Stalin was winning his battle with the Politburo Right, Pokrovskii was not only stressing the theme of class conflict in scholarship, but also participating in attacks on specific non-Marxist historians. \$ He may simply have found it expedient to accept the Shakhty trial message that the bourgeois intelligentsia was involved in a conspiracy against Soviet power. But there is also the possibility of real emotional conversion, whether under the influence of his students or (as some evidence suggests) of his experiences at the International Congress of Historians held in Oslo during the summer.6

By the beginning of 1929, in any case, Pokrovskii had made a major decision: to attack the institutional base of the non-Marxist historians. At the First All-Union Conference of Marxist Historians, an occasion for celebrating the influence and maturity of Marxist historical scholarship, Pokrovskii agreed to support and champion a proposal to liquidate RaNon's Institute of History and create in its place a new institute under the Communist Academy.7

The Communist Academy, designated in the summer of 1929 as the national center for research and graduate teaching, came to include all the institutes of the former RANioN as well as the Institute of Red Professors.8 The new Institute of History opened in the autumn of 1929 with a staff of forty and a relatively modest enrollment of thirty-six graduate students. It was governed by a collegium headed by Pokrovskii and including his close associates, some of whom had been his students in the Institute of Red Professors. Beside it in the Communist Academy was the Society of Marxist Historians, the forum for Marxist discussion in the profession and source of many of the attacks on "bourgeois historians." As the most distinguished of Soviet Marxist historians, Pokrovskii dominated the society and exercised great influence over the work of its younger members.

The "Pokrovski school" dominated the Marxist historians and, from 1929, the Marxist historians dominated the profession through their control of scholarly institutions and journals.

Yet even as circumstances conspired to heighten Pokrovskii's stature and to popularize his historical views, they set obstacles in his path. The Marxist camp was by no means firmly united under his leadership and that of the Society of Marxist Historians. Among those institutions whose work the society aspired to lead and coordinate were Istpart (the Commission for the Study of the October Revolution and the Russian Communist Party), the Lenin Institute, the Marx-Engels Institute, and the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, which published the journal Katorga i ssylka. These institutions were of independent genesis and stood outside the Communist Academy system. The Lenin Institute, merging in 1928 with Istpart to create a large center for the study of party history, established its own facilities for training specialists in 1930, and could scarcely conceal its disdain for the tutelage of the Party Section of the Society of Marxist Historians. The Marx-Engels Institute, headed by the learned and notoriously intransigent Marxist scholar D. B. Riazanov, also failed to express gratitude for projects conceived in the Communist Academy. And the members of the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, which included both Marxist and populist victims of the Tsarist regime, remained true to their revolutionary tradition by ignoring calls for unity.

Pokrovskii's position became less secure as his power over the historical profession increased. It was the phenomenon known in European diplomacy as a threat to the balance-of-power system: consolidation of the profession under Marxist control enhanced Pokrovskii's authority, but at the same time the possibility of his achieving hegemony brought about an opposing coalition within the Marxist camp.

Even among Marxist historians, Pokrovskii had always had intellectual opponents. Among them was I. A. Teodorovich, an Old Bolshevik who had come to the party via populism, occupied important government posts until 1928, and was currently working as chief editor of the journal Katorga i ssylka and head of the new International Agrarian Institute, both of which were outside the Communist Academy system. The major conflict between Teodorovich and Pokrovskii developed out of the fiftieth anniversary celebration of the founding of Narodnaia volia—the most famous of all populist revolutionary groups, responsible for the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in 188 1. Pokrovskii's view of Narodnaia volia was that its ideas had little in common with socialism and that it was essentially a bourgeois party. Teodorovich, on the other hand, saw a political and ideological continuity between the left wing of Narodnaia volia and the later Bolshevik movement. 10 The judgment of each man appeared to coincide with his own early revolutionary experience—Pokrovskii as a socialdemocrat arguing with the populists, Teodorovich as a left populist attracted to the outright revolutionaries among the social-democrats.

Of the two views, Pokrovski's clearly appeared the more "orthodox" for a Bolshevik. However, it was not ideological orthodoxy that determined the course of the dispute, but something much more like sectarian politics. Pokrovskii's supporters were successful in obtaining a resolution of censure on Teodorovich's view from the culture and propaganda (formerly agitprop) department of the Central Committee. 11 But since the resolution was drafted by a historian of the Pokrovskii school (Tatarov), Teodorovich was not disposed to take it as final. He launched an energetic attack on the cliqueishness (gruppovshchina) of Pokrovskii's supporters, notably Gorin, Tatarov, and Fridliand. The kul'tprop censure, he suggested, could have been avoided had he but "invited Gorin to a cup of tea." Instead, he had taken the path of "calling the attention of Party society to the need of exposing these Communist mandarins of historical scholarship."12

Pokrovski's behavior did indeed show some signs of the cliqueishness that Teodorovich attributed to his group. He approached intellectual controversies as a political tactician. His former student P. O. Gorin, now academic secretary of the Institute of History, took the brunt of the battle because of Pokrovskiis illness and trips for medical treatment to Europe; but Pokrovskii offered him detailed tactical advice by letter, suggesting which arrangements he should use, warning against certain stylistic devices that left openings for his opponent, and even commenting on his diction. 13

Pokrovskii saw trouble ahead: "'the signs multiply,' as Lenin once wrote, that a great attack is impending on the right flank."14 He was alarmed at indications of wavering in his own camp when Malakhovskii (a member of the Society of Marxist Historians specializing in the revolutionary movement) "took fright and decided to make peace" with Teodorovich. He noted with concern that Riazanov, of the Marx-Engels

Institute, showed sympathy with the opposition. 15 There was some reason for concern. Teodorovich had access to the pages of Bol'shevik, the party's ideological journal, through his old friend Emelian Iaroslavskii—a senior member of the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Penal Exiles, chairman of the Narodnaia volia jubilee commission, and Teodorovich's companion in the Bolshevik underground and Tsarist prison.

Iaroslavskii had political stature equalling and probably exceeding Pokrovskii's—since 1923 he had been Secretary of the Central Control Commission of the Party and a member of the editorial boards of Pravda, Izvestiia, and Bol'shevik. Within the Communist Academy, he had a status junior to Pokrovskii, having become a member only in 1928. But he was, like Pokrovskii, an editor of the journal of the Society of Marxist Historians, Istorik-marksist, and he played an important role in the governing bureau of a new section of the society dealing with Party history, Leninism, and the Comintern. This Party Section appears to have been something of a Trojan horse within the society: it is described by Soviet historians as concerning itself with the work of the society as a whole, and leading to the struggle against "revisionism, pseudo-Marxism, and bourgeois doctrine."16 Iaroslavskii, furthermore, was a member of the governing body of the Lenin Institute—one of those institutions that resisted the tutelage of the Society of Marxist Historians—and chief editor of four weighty volumes of Party history published between 1926 and 1930, 17 which contained criticism of Pokrovskii's ideas.

In the Narodnaia volia controversy, Iaroslavskii did not offer an ideological defense of Teodorovich's position, but protested that the Society of Marxist Historians should not label Teodorovich as a revisionist "while being silent. . . about the errors of other comrades" whose writings contained "no fewer" errors. Sharing Iaroslavskii's position were Bubnov, a member of the Orgburo of the Central Committee and, as RsFsr Commissar of Education, Pokrovskii's superior in the government hierarchy, and the Party historian N. N. Popov. 18

In response to an appeal from Iaroslavskii "not to mutilate an Old Bolshevik"19 (that is, Teodorovich), Pokrovskii replied unrepentantly:

inc then in he Institute o Red Professors (the last time three days o in the first-year seminar), as I was criticized in the Society of Marxist Historians (the dispute about Chernyshevskii) and most recently in connection with Dubrovskii's book. .. . If you consider the judgment about Teodorovich—[that he] is theoretically close to populist authors—incorrect, . . . you can bring the question before the Central Committee. But should I take it upon myself to "suppress self-criticism" by my personal authority then I assure you, dear Comrade Emelian, nothing will come of it besides the loss of this authority.20

Iaroslavskii then took up the accusation of cliqueishness, commenting in Bol'shevik that the recent discussion among Marxist historians showed "how dangerous the situation is for Bolshevik research into the facts of our past when one or another group of comrades declares revisionist anything that does not fit into its schema."21

Gorin, again taking up the cudgels for Pokrovskii, touched lightly on the possibility that Iaroslavskii's attitude indicated at least a tolerance of political deviation: it was no accident that in the past Pokrovski's views had been attacked by oppositionists like Trotskii and the Bukharinist Slepkov. 22 This ploy—a standard but often very damaging one in Marxist scholarly debates during the cultural revolution—was later neatly reversed by Iaroslavskii, who managed to prove that Gorin had once included unacknowledged extracts from Trotskii's writings in his own work. 23

Pokrovskii was a founding member of the Communist Academy and, in this period, chairman of its presidium. But the academy grew very rapidly from 1928, and as it did so some of the former esprit de corps was lost. New members—especially those who were not of the Old Bolshevik intelligentsia—were not necessarily as respectful of Pokrovskii's authority and intellectual stature as the old ones. Among the new members to whom the Old Bolshevik intellectual tradition was alien was L. M. Kaganovich, elected in 1929. Kaganovich headed the Academy's Institute of Soviet Construction. But from 193o, as head of the Moscow Party committee and a secretary of the Central Committee, he also stood second or third in the hierarchy of the Party leadership.

At the plenum of the Communist Academy held in June 1930, Pomostly emanating from Kaganovich's Institute of Soviet Construction. A. I. Angarov accused him of overlooking the achievements of that institute. Pashukanis (who had headed the Institute until Kaganovich took over, and remained a member) charged that the Presidium of the Academy had failed to assert leadership in ideological discussions and hinted that Pokrovskii should resign on the grounds of his ill health. 24

The Communist Academy was, in fact, ridden with ideological quarrels, the best documented in Western literature being the attack on the philosopher Deborin by a group of junior colleagues. 2 Several of these quarrels were resolved in 1931 (the year of the show trial of the Mensheviks) by the ousting of an "elder statesman" of the profession—Deborin in philosophy, Rubin in economics -on the grounds not only of intellectual heresy but also of previous membership in the Menshevik Party. Pokrovskii had not been a Menshevik, but he had not been an entirely orthodox Bolshevik either. 26 As an elder statesman of the Marxist historical profession, his position was undoubtedly precarious. To clinch a case against him, he reasoned, his opponents would "have to prove that a 'pokrovshchina' in history is the same as a 'rubinshchina' in economics or a 'deborinshchina' in philosophy."27 He hoped they could not do it, but the analogy weighed on his mind.

Pokrovskii supported Deborin in the 1930 dispute of philosophical dialecticians" (Deborin's group) and "mechanists," while Iaroslavskii and Pashukanis opposed him. 28 But he was not unaware that Deborin's aggressive stance had alienated many of his Marxist colleagues and thus contributed to his downfall. Seen in this light, Pokrovskii's own aggressive stance and the faction-fighting among Marxist historians appeared ominous. Pokrovskii wrote to Gorin:

We search out heresy everywhere and will soon find ourselves in the situation of the Deborinites. They, of course, also sought out heresy everywhere and thought that they didn't have to do any work. And then the screws were put to them [ikh prizhali]. And they will put the screws to us if we do not come to our senses in time. . . .29

But Pokrovskii was caught in a vicious circle. Both his group and his opponents' were accustomed to bombard the Central Committee and its kul'tprop departments with complaints and calls for arbitration. Pokrovskii could not end this unilaterally even if, as seems likely, he sensed the danger of airing the historians' dirty linen in front of the party leadership. So the Pokrovskyites continued to complain. In one such letter to the Central Committee, Gorin wrote:

Slander, double-dealing, irresponsible public defamation of one's opponents . . . have, unfortunately, been conventional means of struggle. . . . They vote for our resolutions but in practice sabotage them; they declare their full political confidence in Comrade Pokrovskii . . . and simultaneously disseminate underground "cribs" [shpargalki] which discredit Pokrovskii politically. . . . 30

In January 193 1 Kaganovich, in his capacity as Secretary of the Central Committee, requested a report from Pokrovskii on the state of the historical front, and, shortly after this, Pokrovskii received a note from three members of the Communist Academy Presidium (one of them being Pashukanis) alleging the existence and concealment of theoretical errors and an absence of self-criticism among Marxist historians. 31 In a state of great alarm, Pokrovskii prepared an eighteen-page complaint denouncing opponents by name and defending his historical views. 32 This he sent to Kaganovich, to the other secretaries of the Central Committee and to Molotov, chairman of the All-Union Sovnarkom.

Specifically, what Pokrovskii wanted was a censure of Iaroslavskii33 and, presumably, his removal from the historical field. He did not get it, nor did the campaign against him cease. His closest associates were removed, Gorin being transferred from the Institute of History and the Society of Marxist Historians to become President of the new Belorussian Academy of Sciences, despite Pokrovskii's protest to Molotov that this would be "a catastrophe for the Society, and risks its disintegration."34

Nevertheless, Pokrovskii himself kept his job. His leadership of the Communist Academy was reaffirmed in a Central Committee resolution of March 1931, expressing both criticism and approval of the academy's work.35 Obviously it was a compromise resolution. Equally obviously, it offered no solution for the hostilities, now very deep, existing within the Communist Academy leadership and the Marxist historical profession.

A new crisis followed the Central Committee's resolution almost immediately. This time it directly involved Iaroslavskii, not Pokrovskii, and the issue was the extremely thorny one of Lenin's attitude toward German social-democracy and the Second International in the prewar period. In 1930 a number of discussions on this subject had been held in the Institute of History, revealing that all interpretations were controversial, including that offered in the recently published volume of Party history edited by Iaroslavskii The Istpart journal Proletarskaia revoliutsia published a long article by A. Slutskii, a former Menshevik, now a candidate member of the Party. 36 This provoked a fierce rejoinder in the same journal by K. Pol, a former student of Bubnov in the Institute of Red Professors, who detected Trotskyism in Slutskii's work. 37 Slutskii sought to reply in the journal of the Society of Marxist Historians, Istorik-marksist. The editorial board was divided on the wisdom of publishing the reply, and Iaroslavskii, who supported publication, 38 found himself in a minority. In retaliation, Iaroslavskii held up publication of the jourmal. Only two issues of Istorikmarksist appeared in 1931, none after August. Proletarskaia revoliutsiia was in a similar situation, with the June issue still not in the press in the second half of October.

Iaroslavski's strategy may have been to produce an insoluble conflict among Marxist historians and thus precipitate intervention from above, but if so, he miscalculated the nature of the intervention. During the late summer a stalemate prevailed, with discussion in the Institute of History scheduled for the autumn, and Pokrovskii unavailingly protesting to the Central Committee about the withholding from publication of Istorikmarksist. 39 Slutskii and his opponent for the discussion (S. S. Bankte) prepared papers, and these were duplicated and circulated. "One may suppose that the abstracts . . . fell into the hands of I. V. Stalin," writes a Soviet historian who has had access to relevant unpublished materials. 40 In any case, in the latter part of October, Stalin wrote a letter to the editors of Proletarskaia revoliutsiia41 protesting against the publication of Slutskii's original article—and "blows of steel" fell on the Marxist historians.

Stalin's letter did not constitute intervention on behalf of a faction, although we are told that when the Communist Academy struggle reached the Central Committee Pokrovskii's authority was sustained,42 and- the letter did contain criticism of Iaroslavskii's work.43 What the letter conveyed was lack of patience with historians. How could they argue about "whether Lenin was or was not a real Bolshevik?" (This was Stalin's interpretation of Slutskii's contention that Lenin had underestimated the danger from the "opportunist" centrists of the German Social-Democratic Party.) How could they write political history without understanding politics? ("Who, save hopeless bureaucrats, can rely on written documents alone? Who, besides archive rats, does not understand that a party and its leaders must be tested primarily by their deeds, and not by their declarations?"4s) And finally, what could possibly be the point of publishing articles like Slutskii's? "Perhaps for the sake of a rotten liberalism, so that the Slutskii's and other disciples of Trotskii may not be able to say that they were being gagged? A rather strange sort of liberalism, this, exercised at the expense of the vital interests of Bolshevism. . . ."46

The effect of Stalin's letter was to send the historians (and indeed all othe Marxist scholars) into a flurry of self-criticism. A host of meetings was convoked immediately; in time, Stalin's letter was discussed in every institute of the Communist Academy and every Party organization in the country. The Society of Marxist Historians demanded a review of all existing historical literature, and students of the Institute of Red Professors were formed into brigades preparing assessments of large portions of the existing literature for publication in the press. More than one hundred thirty speakers were dispatched throughout Moscow to deliver reports, and even more were later sent to outlying Republics. According to I. I. Mints (now an Academician, then a young Communist historian associated with the Iaroslavskii group), "extermination of cadres of historians began. Many historians were slandered, then repressed. Many were compelled to admit 'errors. ' "47

Although Iaroslavskii had been mentioned disapprovingly in the letter, his group took the initiative in the meeting of the Party fraction of the Society of Marxist Historians, and apparently were almost successful in pushing through a resolution upholding their position. 48 In the end, however, the resolution went against them: the authors of the four volume Istoria VKP (b) edited by Iaroslavskii were censured for cliqueishness (gruppovshchina)49 —despite the fact that, according to Stalin in the letter, they had erred on "matters of principle." Shortly thereafter, Iaroslavskii recanted before the Central Committee and in letters to the editors of Pravda and Bol'shevik. 50 His disciple Mints also recanted, but still lost his position as Party Secretary in the Institute of Red Professors. Of Iaroslavskii's other associates, A. L. Sidorov and N. L. Rubinstein "went off to do practical work" for a few years, and Dubrovskii suffered a similar shortterm eclipse.51

The Pokrovskii group was criticized for its inability to foster selfcriticism within the Society of Marxist Historians, and, while Pokrovskii's own "basic leadership" was deemed sound, his followers Gorin, Fridliand, and Vanag suffered recriminations, and "materials harmful to Pokrovskii were quietly circulated (though not published) among historians. 52

But neither group was ousted from the leadership of the profession at this time (193132). Iaroslavskii's apologies were accepted early in 1932, 53 and he was soon receiving personal instructions from Kaganovich and Stalin as to just how he should revise his Istoria VKP(b) and how he should present Stalin's role in that history.54 Mints went to work for laroslavskii in the Commission on the History of the Civil War—a lesser, but still respectable, assignment. Pokrovskii died in April 1932, but was succeeded as director of the Institute of History and chief editor of Istorikmarksist by his close associate, N. M. Lukin, a specialist in European history, who had taken over Gorin's place at Pokrovskii's side after the latter's banishment to Belorussia. As before, the current tasks of the historical profession (excluding the realm of Party history, which Iaroslavskii's group continued to dominate) were enunciated by members of the Pokrovskii school, notably Lukin and Pokrovskii's former students, N. N. Vanag and A. M. Pankratova.

By now, of course, the reader is anxiously awaiting the denouement of Pokrovskii's posthumous fall from grace in a "savage campaign," which, Medvedev tells us, was carried out under Kaganovich's direction. The public repudiation of Pokrovskii came only in 1936. 55 But his disgrace was known to historians from the decree "On the teaching of civil history" issued by the Party Central Committee and the Council of People's Commissars on May 16, 1934. This decree, celebrating narrative history and condemning schematism, was implicitly directed against the Pokrovskii school of Marxist historical writing, but did not mention Pokrovskii by name. It was, however, accompanied by two further decrees (August 8 and 9, 1934) on implementation of the May 16 decree, signed by Stalin, Kirov, and Zhdanov, and circulated only among a small group of historians. 6

There are various ways of interpreting this denouement. It can be seen as a belated victory for the Iaroslavskii faction, backed by Kaganovich: Iaroslavskii became a member of the Academy of Sciences; his associates staffed the editorial boards of the leading historical journals; and Iaroslavskii—together with a defector from the Pokrovskii camp, A. M. Pankratova, who had suffered a brief period of exile in the mid-thirties— prepared the two volumes of denigration of Pokrovskii that appeared after his public condemnation. 57

It can also be seen as a decisive intervention on the part of the leadership, a decision to subordinate the recalcitrant historians once and for all to firm control from above. Stalin, Kaganovich, Kirov, and Zhdanov are all reported to have taken a hand in the redirection of historical research and teaching in 1934, and Stalin's involvement in the writing of the Short Course of Party history published in 1938 indicates that he, at any rate, had decided that Party history was too important to be left to Party historians. Undoubtedly historical writing, like other forms of mass and elite communication, was important to Stalin and almost as important to his lieutenants; and this was especially true of the field of Party and revolutionary history.

But there is another dimension. The posthumous denunciation of Pokrovskii was surely a part of the wider trend of repudiation of the Communist intellectuals who were prominent in cultural revolution— Averbakh in literature, Shulgin in educational theory, Pashukanis in law, and so on. This repudiation was accompanied by a conservative turn in cultural and social policy, which Timasheff characterized as "The Great Retreat" (see Hough, this volume). Looking at the historical profession in this general context, we may note that the change of course occurred comparatively late; and moreover that it was a direct outgrowth not of the historical faction fights but of the reorientation of education policy (see Lapidus, this volume) initiated in 1931: the 1934 decree specifically concerned the teaching of history, and the advice given at about the same time to a delegation of historians at a Kremlin reception concerned the writing of textbooks. 58

In history, the "great retreat" is usually identified with the renewed celebration of the Russian national 'tradition—that is, it is described in ideological terms. But in practical terms it also had a meaning: a reacceptance of the old "bourgeois" historians into the leadership of the profession. Again, in comparative terms, this reacceptance came late. The old technical specialists had been rehabilitated by Stalin in 1931; and by the next year they were already occupying official positions and publishing in official journals their uninhibited denunciations of the damage done during cultural revolution to the training of specialists. But from 1934, at any rate, the non-Marxist historians were back in positions of eminence and respect in the profession, writing the textbooks, publishing in the journals, and, ultimately, collaborating with Iaroslavskii in the denunciation of Pokrovskii and, effectively, of the whole effort to create a Marxist historical tradition.

The cultural revolution and subsequent "great retreat" radically changed the historical profession. From the mid-thirties, all historians had to pay lip service to Marxism, just as they did (despite the contradiction involved) to the glories of the Russian national tradition. The old factions were dissolved, or went underground. The profession did not become monolithic, an impossibility in an imperfect world. But it became more uniform and at the same time more docile. The hierarchical framework that emerged was more formal and richer in punitive sanctions than a professional hierarchy based simply on deference to achievement. Yet, insofar as it was a hierarchy for the whole profession, professional achievement was one (though not the only) means of commanding deference within it. This was a very different situation from that of NEp, when historians belonged to one of the two opposing ideological camps, or of the cultural revolution, when the Marxist camp achieved dominance only to undermine its own position by faction-fighting. The Marxist historians had not consolidated "hegemony" during the cultural revolution. However, in trying to do so and failing, they may have inadvertently helped provide the preconditions for professional integration.
