> 来源：A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham)\A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Design by Choice

## 1951-1961 AN ALPHABETICAL CHRONICLE OF LANDMARKS AND INFLUENCES

Alarmlst Literature: In the 1950's the shortcomings of some aspects of product design became a subject for sensational journalism which—in some cases—contained an element of serious warning. The most prolific of these professional Jeremiahs was the American writer, Vance Packard, whose book The Hidden Persuaders drew attention to the social consequences of motivation research (q.v.). His subsequent works The Status Seekers and The Waste Makers continued variations of the same theme of social enquiry into design, but began to suggest that he had fallen victim to the very situation against which he was protesting: his elevation to the best-seller class involved him in the dynamics of the mass market and more or less committed him to bring out a 'new model' every other year. At a less sensational level, warnings to consumers were transmitted in Great Britain by way of the Editorials in Which? and Shoppers' Guide.

Appllance: The increasing mechanization of households in the Western world, and the beginning of

It is said that Industrial Design has altered out of recogniio in he s t yarAteatively  isaid thay fashions have changed, and that Industrial Design is what it always was. It would be as well, therefore, to start by setting out what is unchanged, and what has been transformed. Firstly, the subject matter of Industrial Design has not changed; it is still concerned with (a) quality (materials and workmanship); (b) performance (functional and human) and (c) style (of appearance and use). Secondly, the problem of Industrial Design has not changed; it is still a problem of affluent democracy, where the purchasing power of the masses is in conflict with the preferences of the élite. In a subsistence economy there is no problem (though progressive Indians are just beginning to be aware of it) and in a controlled society there is no problem—a couple of jovial

mechanization of households in other continents, gave a special status to electrical and other poweroperated tools in the eyes of manufacturers, designers and consumers. The rise of "'do-it-yourself' acquainted many householders with small power tools for the first time, but also introduced a degree of mechanization into the creative work of painters, sculptors and designers, thus giving them an increased first-hand knowledge and sympathy for the world of appliance design—the whole output of Charles Eames (q.v.) can be related in one way or another to the mechanization of the designers' workshop, but appliances also claimed a widely recognized function as indicators of the social status of their owners. The diversification of different types of refrigerators and washing-machines, not to mention the almost annual increase in the screen size of television sets, became a recognized method of indicating or claiming improved social and financial status, and was duly damned by puritanical critics and sociologists. At the same time, however, certain less grandiose appliances became the accepted symbols of intellectual status—the possession of an Olivetti typewriter (q.v.) or a Braun gramophone or radio became one of the standard ploys in the world of intellectual snobbery.

Aspen Congress: One of the major international centres of discussion of industrial design was established at the mountain resort of Aspen, Colorado, which had been built up by the late Walter Paepke, President of Container Corporation of America, as a species of secular retreat for medita tion and discussion among business executives. The Annual Design Congress there, of which there have been now twelve, confronted the leading opinion-makers of the American business world with designers, manufacturers, critics and theorists from Europe, South America and Japan. While the findings of these congresses don't constitute a body of literature comparable with that of CIAM, the reports made annually by speakers returning to their native countries and customary business, have provided a running survey of the preoccupation and troubles of thinking designers all over the world. Aspen has, to some extent, replaced the Triennale (q.v.) as a world centre of opinion and debate.

Brand Image (or House Style): During the 1950's it became the practice in all large industrial concerns tinculcate nto theminds  te public a re able style to identify their products or services. In many cases this was a process of necessary rationalization where a large firm found itself with a number of different styles and a number of different de signers. Where unification of style was undertaken as a form of rationalization and in good taste, this process was known as 'creating a house style,' but

But, in the affluent democracies where the problem exists, the whole manner of squaring up to the subject matter of Industrial Design has changed, because the foundation stone of the previous intellectual structure of Design Theory has crumbled—there is no longer universal acceptance of Architecture as the universal analogy of design. When the Modern Movement was young, there were obvious and valid reasons for giving architects hegemony over the training of designers and the formulation of theory: architects alone of arts men had any technical training even remotely applicable to product design; alone of tech-men they had a sufficiently liberal education to be able to relate their designs to the general environment of human life; they alone had been doing anything consciously to further the practice and theory of Industrial Design.

Almost everything of interest written, said or done in this field between 1900 and 1930 is the work of an architect or someone closely connected with architecture— Voysey, Lethaby, Muthesius, Gropius, Wright, Le Corbusier, Moholy-Nagy, all heirs of the polymath attitude of the Morris/ Webb circle of the previous century. In the next twenty years to 1950 the architectural claim was accepted by writers like Edgar Kaufmann and Herbert Read as the natural basis for argument—the latter announcing in his Art and Industry of 1934 'I have no other desire in this book than to support and propagate the ideals. expressed by Doctor Gropius. Theonly novelty of even apparent consequence in this line of thought did not appear until 1954, when G. C. Argan, at that year's Triennale Congress proposed that urbanism, rather than architecture, should be at the head of the design hierarchy.

But evenat that date, alternative estimates of the a re and nciples nustrial Desad begun pear. Paradoxically, while most of these favoured the kind of design associated with the architectural dispensation—spare, neat, unadorned, etc.—they defended it by arguments that could equally well have been used to

where it was undertaken as part of an advertising campaig it was called fig the brand image Eamples of both processes can be seen in the stabiization hai station equipment by such companies as Shell/BP or Esso, both of whom developed international styles in the period; in the restyling programmes undertaken by brewery companies like Courage in the earlier 1950's, and Watney towards the end of the decade; and in the restyling fchain stores.

British Rallways: Though it is the largest industrial concern in Britain, and probably in Europe, British Railways did not set the universally high standards of design that were hoped for at the time of nationalization. Nevertheless, valiant efforts were made, in spite of the progressive dismemberment of British Railways into independent regions, and as na tionalized concerns go, it has probably done as much as any, except the Post Office, to promote a lively attitude to design. The change-over to diesel traction has had industrial designers built into the contract as consultants almost from the beginning, and although there have been technical difficulties, the influence of Design Research Unit and of Jack Howe has been noticeably beneficial. Other British Railway adventures in design include experimental carriage interiors designed by various architects; the setting up of a Design Advisory Panel in an attempt to improve the style of station equipment; and the activities of Eastern Region's development group in improved ticket-office design; and in commissioning waiting-room furniture by Robin Day which should become standard for all regions.

Cltroen: Like the Volkswagen (q.v.) the Citroen was one of the two fixed points in a world of rapidly changing car design—until 1957 when the familiar Traction-avant of 1934 vintage was dramatically replaced by the DS 19. Although few found it possible to admire the DS's apparent mixture of different automotive styles, brand-loyalty coupled with something like awe at its technical specification served to establish the DS, almost at once, in the same position of esteem as was enjoyed by the preceding model, and by the end of the decade its radical appearance no longer excited the same alarm as before.

Consumer Research: The formal recognition of a specific consumer viewpoint in relation to industrial design is one of the more important new factors that has emerged in the 1950's. Viewed broadly, it covers market research into consumer preferences and human engineering or ergonomics (q.v.) as well as what is more specifically regarded as the defence of consumers' interests. Organizations for vour copletely dferent stylsdesThe classic instance is Hayakawa's essay, memorably entitled Your Car Reveals your Sex Fears, which assailed Detroit styling by means of semantic and ikonographic arguments that could equally well have been used to demonstrate, say, how the London taxi, acclaimed by Charles Eames as the best industrial design in the world, reveals the communal death-wish of the English ruling classes.

Eames must be saluted at this point as the last figure from the architectural side to make a significant contu tion—with his Ahmedabad Report—to design thinking. Otherwise, architects have relinquished control of the mind of design to theorists and critics from practically any other field under the sun. The new men in the U.S.A., for instance, are, typically liberal sociologists like David Reisman or Eric Larrabee; in Germany, the new men at Ulm are mathematicians, like Horst Rittel, or experimental psychologists like Mervyn Perrine; in Britain they tend to come from an industrial background, like Peter Sharp, John Chris Jones or Bruce Archer, or from the pop-art polemics at the ICA like Richard Hamilton. In most Western Countries, the appearance of consumer-defence organizations has added yet another voice, another viewpoint, though no very positive philosophy.

In these circumstances, where no single viewpoint is sufficiently widely held to make effective communication possible, arguments tend to be conducted in an eclectic framework of postulates gathered from a variety of disciplines; the basis of selection may be unscrupulously slanted to justify some point of view to which the speaker is committed (this is true of most arguments on aesthetics or styling) or, more honestly, to give directions through a field that needs to be explored—hence the preoccupation with information theory at Ulm, where it is felt that many pieces of equipment are insufficiently explicit about their functions and mode of use. Lash-up formulations of this sort are, of course, only ad hoc intellectual structures and should be neatly put away when they have done the job for which they were assembled. Thus, a narrowly Stalinist frame of reference, rigidly maintained beyond its last point of utility, has resulted in the sterility this latter purpose have emerged both at an official and unofficial level; thus most of the nationalized industries have some form of Consumers' Consultative Committee built into their administrative structure, and the British Standards Institute sponsors a Consumers' Advisory Council which publishes a periodica!—Shoppers' Guide. However, there are also Consumer organizations whose attitude embodies an element of social protest, viz.: The Consumers' Councils in the U.S.A. and the Consumers' Association in England, which publishes a periodical called Which?, and whose leading figure, Michael Young, has even proposed the formation of a Consumers political party (see his pamphlet The Chipped White Cups of Dover).

Design Centre: The foundation of the Design Centre in the Haymarket, London, gave the Council of Industrial Design an opportunity to give tangible form to its views on design by placing on show a constantly changing selection of products, chosen by Committees appointed by the Council. Although the selections have constantly been a subject of dispute throughout the subsequent five years of the Centre's existence, they have undoubtedly performed an important function, if only in putting before the public alternatives to the normal commercial selections undertaken by buyers for even the most progressive shops. It was only towards the end of this five-year period that doubts began to be expressed that the Centre might be driving the Council of Industrial Design into something like a commercial position itself, when it was observed that the rents recovered from exhibitors at the Centre amounted to a sizeable proportion of the Council's income.

Detroit: If the most suspect aspects of commercial design were symbolized by any one object or class of objects in the 1950's it was by the American automobile industry—the phrase 'Detroit-Macchiavellismus' was coined in Germany to describe everything that was felt to be hateful about U.S. design. At the same time, there was a visible tendency to admire Detroit products for their unconventionality and boldness, and even in some circles serious attempts to discuss objectively their social and moral implications. In many ways Detroit was a symbol also for the War of the Generations, and the language of American automobile advertising be came the language of revolt among the young. The hard core of any admiration for Detroit, however, was the belief that here was a language of visual design, no longer based on subjective standards like 'good taste,but on bjective research intoconsumers' preference and motivations. The phrase 'an objective aesthetic' could be taken to refer

and subsequent disappearance of radical left-wing design criticism in Western democracies, and leaves intelligent socialists, like Richard Hoggart, apparently sharing the opinions of an 'Establishment' that they otherwise despise.

For those who are not too rigid, however, the situation is, as the saying goes, manipulative—it is possible to discuss anything, even the validity of the architectural claim. Not on the basis of right or wrong—Industrial Design can use a short rest from exclusive moralities—but on the basis of what contribution architects could reasonably be expected to make, and the needs they might reasonably hope to see satisfied.

Looking back, one sees that in truth large parts of the architectural claim have never been seriously pressed— aircraft design, for instance, has cheerfully been left to aero-dynamicists, architects retaining only the right to criticize the results. There are other areas where architects have persistently intervened—pleasure boats are an example—without contributing anything very interesting to their design; clearly, architects have extracurricular activities where they put their professional skills on one side. But, where, then, is the architect's real area of painful or profitable involvement with industrial design? It is easiest to define convincingly by considering questions of scale and propinquity—how big things ar, and how near to buildings. A survey of architectural communications such as conversations, letters to editors, and other daily small-talk will show that architects are hypersensitive to the design of objects roughly comparable in scale to building components. Some of this sensitivity is simply an atavistic relic from the days when the architectural claim wasuniversal in its coverage, but if it is trimmed down to include only objects in or near buildings, then it makes operational sense. Architects areclearly rht to e concened over the desihings like automobiles, lamp-posts, refrigerators and crockery, since these are classes of objects that commonly inhabit the same view, occupy the same space, supplement the functions of their buildings and no one in his right mind will deny their rght to be heard on such subjects.

Eames, Charles: Although a number of substantial fiures in the world of desi emerged inor around the decade following the Festival of Britain, none has made so great an impact on the world, both by his products and his personality, as Charles Eames. By 1951 his first chairs in moulded plywood on steel frames were becoming known outside the United States of America, and were the inspiration of innumerable copies all over Europe, and in most other continents. It was generally recognized that the Eames Chair constituted the first major development in chair design since the Breuer chairs of After this there followedin a bewidring succession, toys, films, scientific researches, lecture tours, special exhibits, three further genera tions of chairs, the celebrated Ahmedabad report on design in development countries, and a great number of awards and citations, culminating in the Kaufmann award to himself and his wife Ray in recognition of their work together for the progress of industrial design.

Ergonomics: The most important branch of design science by the end of the 1950's was undoubtedly Ergonomics, which seemed likely to push matters of taste and aesthetics well into the background. As the derivation of the word suggests, the earliest studies to receive the name were concerned with economy of human effort in the operation of mechanical equipment, notably complicated electronic and aeronautical equipment developed towards the end of the War, some of which taxed the mental and physical capacity of its operators beyond the limits of efficiency. By the end of the decade, however, the term had been expanded by thinkers and readers in many parts of the world to cover all forms of relationships between man and equipment, including purely physical studies of human engineering and the communicative studies of control systems and others, in which matters of mental capacity and perception of vision were involved. Unlike most words or phrases, which are promoted to the level of slogans or catchwords, Ergonomics has generated little facile optimism, except for a faith that by patient and painstaking research the relationship between men and their tools can be improved. At one level this has meant quite simply the reshaping of the handles of traditional tools, but at other levels it has meant exercises as abstract as the devising of new sets of symbols for the keys on the control panels of computers.

Festival of Britain: Great hopes were entertained for the influence that the Festival of Britain would have on the arts of design, and the level of public

T   o ia clais that architects ae 'total desiner'r - be r the whoua viment,ut sply t say that even he practice arhitecture viewn quite a narrow and conventional professional sense, h ally part of theirbuildings nor mentioned in the specifica tion, but is, nevertheless, their concern.

It ought to be much more their concern than it is at presnt. Even if we no longer regard the architect as the universal analogy for the designer, a large area of the architectural claim isrightly his But if this is an area where he has rights, then he also has responsibilities. If he is to be heard, then his utterance must carry weight— howls of I won't have that ugly trash in my building' will no longer serve, reasons must be given, improvements suggested.

But how? If architects have lost their original dominance over the field—a dominance always more de jure than de facto—what is their standing now? It is precisely at the level of objects comparable in scale to building components that the average architect's capacity as a designer begins to taper off, and this diminished capacity is due far less to technical ignorance of, say, electronics or gas technology, than to the training, experience and habits of mind that fit a man to be an architect. This combination of intellectual factors tends to make an architect not only unfit to design free-standing appliances, but even the interiors of his own buildings—as the Architectural Review pointed out in justification of its Interior Design features in April 1958.

As was also pointed out then, the fundamental difficulty is incompatible rates of obsolescence; architects, for entirely valid reasons, are habituated to think in terms of a time scale whose basic unit is about half a century. Industrial design works on a variety of time-scales, roughly proportional to the bulk of the objects being designed, and none of them phased in units one fifth the size of the architect's. This situation is not the product of an evil economic situation, as professional alarmists like Vance Packard maintain (though there is a constant taste. At first sight, the whole exercise was a failure in these terms: its influence, as Sir Gerald Barry (its Director) more or less admitted in a 10th Anniversary lecture, has been practically negligible in the field of design—the 'Festival Style' has practically disappeared from the face of the land and left only a few travesties behind. But it is clear that for reasons that are not altogether coincidental, the Festival marks a turning point in the history of public taste in Britain. Public taste may not have improved, but it has become infinitely more sophisticated in the ten years since the Festival. This development must be attributed to the influence of the mass media such as television and illustrated magazines, but the Festival played a vital part in setting before the public an image of a brighter, smarter and more colourful world of design. This may not have been what the originators of the Festival set out to do, but in this they undoubtedly secured a lasting success.

Itallan Craze: One of the most remarkable developments of the 1950's was the craze for Italian design which galvanized the smarter elements of all classes of British Society. The Scooter, the Olivetti typewriter, furniture by Gio Ponti, hairstyling by Richard Henry, Espresso coffee and its attendant ma chinery, certain tricks of shape, design and display, and even certain type faces from the Nebiolo foundry, helped to stamp the image of Italy as the home of good design at all levels of consumption. The reasons for this development have baffled critics and sociologists from the time of its first appearance in 1953 to its waning around 1960. The Triennale (q.v.) was a major contributing influence at the level of conscious design. The cinema and motorracing also played their part, but explanations based simply on good taste and engineering cannot explain the whole Italian mania. Espresso machines, as several critics pointed out, usually had a strong flavour of Detroit or 'Paris 1925.' There is little doubt that the rise of teenage affluence and the improved quality of inexpensive, fashionable clothes, had also a large part in the phenomenon.

Japan: In 1960 it was discovered that Italian manufacturers were plagiarizing Japanese designs for transistor radios—a situation that symbolized, as well as anything could, the change of exotic influences on Western design. Everything in the way of studied elegance and rare qualities in the handling of materials that had been true of Italian design, was found to be yet more true of Japanese, with the added incentives of the abstract power of Japanese calligraphy, the philosophical prestige of Zen Buddhism, and the technical aptitude of the Japanese for Miniaturization (q.v.). At the architectural level these developments were supported by the growing pressure towards hastened obsolescence in capitalist countries) but exists because industrial designers are creating objects in which the opposing forces of stabilized investment and technical improvement are in a different equilibrium to that governing the design of a building. A building-structure will not be disastrously out of date for some centuries in many cases, and there are lifts at work in London that saw the century in, but are still mechanically sound and have not been rendered noticeably obsolete by sixty years of technical improvement.

But a sixty year old car, even if in perfect mechanical condition, would nowadays cause traffic jams and invite accidents if it were let loose among the nimbler products of more recent decades—as witness the elaborate policing and marshalling required to isolate the carefully maintained veterans on the Brighton Run from real traffic. This is an extreme case of rapid mechanical obsolescence, no doubt (only by an architect's standards, by those of aeronautics or electronics, automotive technology has been sluggish) but it can easily be paralleled inside buildings—consider the history of electric lighting from carbon filament to colour corrected cathode, from the concentrated light source of a bare bulb in an exposed socket, that even Brutalists tolerate only as a gesture, to the even glow from a lumenated ceiling that psychologists and physiologists are already beginning to question for going too far the other way.

The design of light fittings is very much a case in point. On the basis of scale and propinquity, they lie firmly within the architectural area of concern. Over the years, a number of leading modern architects, from Rietveld to Utzon, havaderays ntohe ti , and—the product being mechanically simple—they have been able to produce equipment that was workable as well as handsome. But, reviewing the period covered by this development, one cannot help feeling that an excess of aesthetic and emotional capital has been squandered on ephemera. There is hardly any important modernmovement interior that is still it as the architect originally designed it—not only the equipment but the whole installation has been rendered obsolete by later events.

reputation of men like Kenzo Tange and Maekawa, and the final seal of Western acceptanceof Japanese dominance was set by the enthusiasm with which Western designers, critics and theorists participated in the World Design Congress inTokyo in 1960.

Jet Liners: The successful establishment of the Jet Passenger Liner in air transportation marked the first major break-through in air-lneperation sice the introduction  the frst Boeings and Douglases early in the 1930's. They also marked a phase of increasing sophistication in air travel, and nearly all had their interiors designed by well-known industrial desig oices, rather than by the aircraft designers. Whether French, American or British, all tended towards a grey and tan international style with aluminum trim, except for the Russians who resolutely maintained their traditional Victorian Rococo with cut-glass and flowers even on the TU104.

Magazines: Late in the 1950's one of the pioneer industrial design magazines passed away in one of those fits of financial cannibalism which currently overtake the British Press. However, Art and Industry had been displaced long before its death by the ColD magazine Design which—though born before the beginning of the decade under review—had gone from strength to strength in circulation, in breadth of vision (under the editorship of Michael Farr) and in international prestige. It was in particular one of the organs that made known the science of ergonomics (q.v.) to working designers all over the world. Its most distinguished foreign contemporaries by the end of the decade, though of varying influence in Britain, were Industrial Design (New York), the most professional of design magazines under the editorship of Jane Fiske McCullough who finally retired from the paper in 1960, and the other was Stile Industria, an offshoot of the Domus publishing house, under the editorship of Alberto Rosselli, which consistently maintained the Italian viewpoint, both on matters of practice and theoretical approach.

Medals and Awards: It was justifiably observed by an Italian critic that the ever-increasing supply of medals, certificates, prizes and other awards for designers, were signs of an inflationary epoch in design. As far as Britain is concerned the most important awards were those given by the ColD under a variety of names, finally stabilized as the 'Design Centre Awards.' These were supplemented in 1959 by the 'Duke of Edinburgh's Award for Elegant Design,' a clear indication of the vastly increased prestige of industrial design in the eyes of British governing classes. Perhaps the most hotly discussed of all awards in the 1950's was the 'Compasso

In other fields, where theirtechnical inadequacis e mousihi y what ho despise in other designers—style up the outside of ma chinery that has been designed by somebody else. The amr ur ilt whiceveything herhiteccapablede is bundled into cupboards that he can design. But this solution, too, is subject to the effects of technical obsolescence, as cookers, radios, and so forth, change their bulk, performance, power needs and relationship to the surrounding space, and entirely new equipment such as TV enters the domestic scene. Built-in equipment is little more than an attempt to impose a veneer of totalitarian order in a situation where something like democratic give and take may have been more to the point.

This, again, is not to ask the architect to abandon responsibility for the equipment in the buildings he is called upon to design, for it is possible to abandon the position of autocratic dominance implicit in Bauhaus theory without losing control of the over-all design. Very small powers of accommodation enable an architect to do what Le Corbusier anticipated as long ago as 1925, that is, to exercise creative choice. His Pavillon de I'Esprit Nouveau was entirely furnished and equipped from manufacturers' catalogues, without the architect himself having to design a thing. Although the convincing unity of the total effect was doubtless helped by the fact that the rooms themselves had been designed in what he conceived to be the style of the objects that were to furnish them (and in this there is a lesson to be pondered), the whole operation was a triumph of disciplined and adventurous selection from what was at hand.

This, in practice, is how most architects and interior designers work anyhow. In the 1960's an architect knows he will be able to equip his interiors with Eames chairs, Noguchi lamps, Braun radios, Saarinen tables and so forth from stock, and the knowledge of their availability probably colours his designing, unconsciously, from the very beginning. Coloured, but not inhibited—the catalogues also offer him Bertoia chairs, Jacobsen chairs, Robin Day chairs; Utzon lamps, Rotaflex lamps, Atlas

d'Oro,' sponsored by the Rinascente store in Milan as a kind of annual supplement to the Triennale. Awarded on an international basis by an international jury, the Compasso d'Oro reflected a growing crisis on design criticism by being awarded in 1960 and 1961 to the ColD, and to MIT, thus showing a clear lack of any confidence in the jury's ability to select an individual design or individual designer for a premiation; in contrast, the jury of the Kaufmann award (founded in 1960) clearly had no difficulty in awarding their substantial money prize to Charles and Ray Eames.

Minlaturization: The transistor radio has become the most obvious symbol of miniaturization in practice, and is the culminating development of a train of thinking in electronics which has been proceeding since the first airborne radar during the second World War. However, it is not the only trend in electronics, as witness the growing size of television screens, and it is not restricted to the electronic field. There has been a conspicuous and growing development of miniaturization in the world of personal transport, made possible by accumulated mechanical improvements over the previous 20 years. Italian motor-scooters at the beginning of the 1950's were succeeded by German bubble-cars in the middle of the decade, and by the BMC Ado 150 (Mimi-Minor or Austin 7) at the end of the decade. At the same time, Detroit reversed its own committed policy and introduced a flock of compact cars which, like the European miniatures, were distinguished by radical technical improvements as well as their diminished size.

MotIvatlon Research: The branch of advertising regarded with the gravest suspicion in alarmist literature (q.v.) was Motivation Research, which formed the theme of Packard's first book The Hidden Persuaders. The object of this rather dubious science was to establish the \*'real' or subconscious reasons for buying one product or another. It is thus, in a sense, a subbranch of ergonomics since it deals with a particular, though short-lived, relationship between man and equipment, and was cautiously welcomed by broad-minded ergonomists as an extension of our precise knowledge of man. Conversely, the manipulative intentions of its practitioners were clearly liable to anti-social perversion, but any mass take-over of consumers' minds seems to have been prevented by the imprecision of MR techniques of investigation. From the designer's point of view, MR was most suspect as yet another restriction on his freedom to design and his freedom to serve the public as he felt best. Yet it should be noted that one of the major triumphs of MR's High-Priest, Dr. Ernest Dichter, was to make a suggestion that any competent designer should have been able to make

lamps. . . The range of choice is so broad that the equipment of the building by objects that were not designed by the architect may not diminish the value of the finished work by one material or aesthetic particular. Indeed, the prestige inherent in knowing that the chairs are by one of the world's greatest industrial designers and the radios by another adds a peculiar lustre to the whole operation.

However, the very breadth of choice increases the architect's responsibility—he must resist the temptation to hand over the interior to Jacobsen, Noguchi, Bertoia and Co. His choice must be disciplined by a clear idea of what the building has to do, and if there is nothing just right in the catalogues at hand, then he must go to other catalogues, his choice must be adventurous—none of the furniture in the Pavillon de I'Esprit Nouveau came from the catalogues of 'domestic' furniture manufacturers, it was all office and factory equipment.

Here, indeed, is one of the points where the architectural profession has a job to do in industrial design. By way of contract furnishing, architects are amnong the most articulate and most powerful sections of consumers, in some fields the most powerful absolutely. They have power economically in the market, they also have experience that far outstrips that of any domestic consumer who perhaps buys a dozen chairs in a lifetime, they are trained to study functional problems and human requirements. Simply by the exercise of their market influence, architects may find that they are in a position to kill a poor design, encourage a good one, and embolden a manufacturer to tool up for a new product. Further, by their experience and training they should be in a position to advise and assist manufacturers and designers to produce better goods, even where mechanical complexity puts them (as in the case of communications, ventilating systems, etc.) right outside their technical competence as architects.

Ti  y ot eu  is gt  ee cni field where positive action can be taken. However, there il v of rear-view mirrors to farm tractors so that those who set their hands to the plough need not look back.

in the Italian craze and in the wider design sense, was best illustrated by the violent reaction to its threatened demise in 1960. The original design for the small portable (which has always been the hinge of the argument) was the work of Marcello Nizzoli, who is, of course, still the designer responsible for all Olivetti products. The neat, squarish case he devised was constantly being held up as an example of pure straightforward design in contrast to American 'styling,' but was in fact itself a styling job, since Nizzoli was in no way responsible for the machinery inside. This point was avoided in dicussion until Diaspron, arger typewrite peared in late 1959. This had faceted side and front panels, no doubt for quite sound constructional reasons, but immediately brought down the wrath of the critics on Nizzoli's head, because it was (apparently) 'irresponsible styling.' The rea sons for the change of style, apart from any technical considerations, were clearly commercial, but Olivetti, probably because of his enlightened social policy, has always been treated as if he were nothing to do with commerce. What will happen under the new style and the new management, which has succeeded since Adriano Olivetti's early death, remains to be seen.

Organlzations: The profession of designer became more heavily organized as well as more heavily bemedalled as the idea of design as an independent profession took hold and established itself. No longer content to proceed under the aegis of other professional bodies, such as those devoted to architecture, designers established or took control of new organizations in order to speak with their own voice. In Britain a major attempt was made to give the SIA (Society of Industrial Artists) a status and function equivalent almost to that of the RIBA, and, at a wider level, ICSiD (International Council of Societies for Industrial Design) founded in 1957, began to assume functions broadly analogous to those of the IUA, though it has, so far, met more frequently. One of the major professional problems of both bodies has been the stabilization or establishment of effective copyright in design—a matter in which they are professionally ahead of architects.

Packaging: New ways of selling, summed up in the ambiguous phrase 'merchandising,' centred attention on the way in which goods were presented at the point of sale, but they also brought new classes of goods within the field covered by the package-

l cht   pathecterdee, ut y nary domestic occupier. Here is a classic instance of a conflict between mass taste and the preferences of an elite—or, in the form of words used to describe the situation when the Unité at Marseilles was ready for occupa tion, 'What will happen when the bourgeoisie move in with their inherited prejudices and imitation Louis Quinze wardrobes?' Le Corbusier's solution, to build in so much built-in furniture that there was no room for wardrobes and barely room to voice a prejudice, was, in fact, the result of unforeseeable circumstances, and not even he would normally advocate so undemocratic a procedure.

For the architect simply to 'retire hurt' when faced with this situation, is no solution, and the idea of designing 'background architecture' of studied neutrality is an unconvincing attempt to make a thin virtue from a pressing necessity—there is no way of disposing a door and a window in a rectangular space without setting up a relationship that can be wrecked by an ill-placed TV set. The need is some sort of reasonably permissive architecture with built-in directions about where to put things. The socalled Appliance-House solution to this problem has tended, so far, either to take too much for granted, or to make heavy weather of the directions. Either it assumes too readily a community of taste between architect and occupier (Kikutake's 'Sky House' is occupied by Kikutake himself, so the problem disappears, but what happens when someone else moves in) or else—as in most of the Smithson projects in this genre—the whole house tends to degenerate into a series of display niches for everchanging relays of hire-purchased status-symbols.

But there is no need for such elaborate controls, nor for hidden persuaders hopefully contrived out of plays of colour and lighting—though these have never yet proven sufficiently reliable to direct a Louis Quinze Wardrobe or seven cubic foot refrigerator to the point where the architect hopes to find it. On the contrary, the traditional location of a fifteen-amp plug next to the traditional British fireplace has done much to keep the TV set within the traditional area of focused attention in the traditional British designer's art. If frozen foods were the classic example of the new merchandising and the new packaging techniques, it should also be observed that long-playing gramophone records in their smartly designed sleeves, and reprints of best-sellers in exclamatory paper-back bindings, brought music and literature into the realm of general merchandising, both being sold through general stores, tobacconists and other non-specialist outlets. The actual design of such packages became one of the most flourishing departments of the graphic arts during this decade and like TV (q.v.) brought the latest and most sophisticated types of design into domestic environments which had hitherto been immune to them.

'Pop' Art: Alongside ergonomics (q.v.) one of the emergent concepts, though a bitterly disputed one, of the 1950's, was that of 'pop' art. This was distinguished from earlier vernacular arts by the professionalism and expertise of its practitioners (i.e. Rock 'n' Roll singers, TV stars, etc.). The concept was widely discussed in Europe and the United States, and impinges on industrial design at two points—two points which are not altogether independent of one another. Firstly, its visual manifestations, as in advertising or Detroit car-styling, were often endowed with a vitality (not always bogus) that seemed absent from the fine arts and from 'good' design. Secondly, the protagonists of 'pop' art at an intellectual level, i.e. those who insisted that it should be taken seriously and discussed rationally, maintained that there was no such thing as good and bad taste, but that each identifiable group or stratum of Society had it own characteristic taste and style of design—a proposition which clearly undermines the argument on which nearly all previous writing about taste in design had been based. This position was not adopted by any established authority in design, but was given serious discussion at some schools and was certainly accepted by a large part of the student body in most schools.

Televislon: The great increase in popular sophistication about allvisual matters, including design, in the 1950's must be largely attributed to Television, even more than to magazines or educational bodies. For the first time, almost, in the history of man, a great part of the population was introduced to a constant stream of smart visual images, was shown new products and Old Masters, either in their own right or as the backgrounds to drama and discussion. In so far as well-designed products ae smart in appearance, they have undoubtedly benefited from this trend whose influence had hardly been anticipated at the beginning of the 1950's. Television companies themseives seemed only sitting room. With this approach, the architect no longer attempts to impersonate all the characters in the drama of design, as in the days of the universal analogy, but becomes the producer of the play, handling a mixed cast of metropolitan professionals and local talent.

This is a workable situation, provided the producer knows his players well enough to gauge the effect of adlibbing and playing off the cuff—what happens in the architectural dialogue between dressing-table and light source, how far the eternal triangle of the three-piece suite can be expected to share the stage with a picture window opposite the fireplace. To handle these problems effectively—so effectively that he need not regret that the objects involved are not designed as he would have designed them—an architect needs to know just how, and how strongly, some desirable and visually fascinating piece of equipment like a tape recorder or a coffeepercolator focuses attention and thence organizes the visual and functional space around it. This must be known and thoroughly understood, if only at the intuitive level of knowing instinctively that a poster will always have a more galvanic effect than an abstract painting, that the real landmark in the length of the Grande Galérie of the Louvre is not the Mona Lisa but the view out of the window into the traffic of the Place du Carrousel.

It might appear, on the strength of a broad survey of present purely technical trends in design, that this problem is about to disappear. A really desirable and sophisticated (in the engineer's sense of the term) central heating system deals with the problem of the well-designed radiator by abolishing radiators and disappearing into the floor-slab or under the carpet. A man who looked at a TV set of Britain Can Make It vintage saw a lot of cabinet work as well as a small screen, but a head-on view of a modern twenty-one-incher is apt to consist simply of the screen itself. Nothing has shrunk faster than stereophonic gramophones, except sound radio, where transistors have produced such rapid miniaturization that there is a sort of regretful vacuum round the source of sound. And just when architects were despairing of ever making electronic lamp, but programmes dealing specifically with design and visual arts, became a little more common as the 1960's began, on both the BBC and commercial networks.

Trlennale: Four Triennali di Milano fall within the scope of this survey and of these, only the 11th in 1957 can be dismissed as trivial, partly because of the poor quality of the exhibits, and partly because of its failure to pullin an influential audience—neither the trend-setters nor their followers took much notice of it. The 9th and 10th (1951 and 1954), however, probably did more to establish the image of Italian design in the public mind than any other equivalent manifestation, and the 10th was followed by a Congress on industrial design that marks the beginning of a new self-consciousness among Italian designers, and sense of international solidarity amongst designers at large. The disappointing results of the 11th were to some extent a consequence of Italian self-satisfaction with the preceding two, and a degree of international boredom with Italian design that was already becoming apparent among the leaders of taste, if not among the mass followers. The 12th in 1960 was at crosspurposes with its audience. Intended as a serious revival of the best standards of the Triennale, it was unfortunately attended largely by those who had only now caught up with Italian design at a purely fashionable level, and its exhibits did not really receive the discussion that was their due. Among those exhibits was, of course, the complete Nottingham school which marks probably Britain's greatest impact on the international world of design.

Ulm: The Hochschule für Gestaltung at Ulm was certainly among the most important design organization to emerge in the last ten years. Originally founded in memorial piety as a successor to the Bauhaus at the time that most of the American descendants of the Bauhaus were going into decline, it had a functional plan in its buildings (designed by Max Bill) and a teaching programme (also directed by Max Bill) that both strongly recalled the original Bauhaus. In 1956 and 1957, however, there was something of a 'Palace Revolution' and a new order effectively headed by Tomas Maldonado took over the running of the school. An innovation of considerable importance made on this point was the disappearance of the Fine Art or Graphics department such as one normally finds in a school of this sort and their replacement by a division of verbal and visual communication. Ulm was thus the first school to withdraw completely and programmatically from the earlier dispensation dominated by architecture much visual and spatial sense of domestic exteriors lumberewitatuoastinettyleDets, suddenly there were compacts and Mini-minors.

Miniaturization appears to be a consistent tendency at present, that must be agreed, but the chances are that the objects concerned will become more concentratedy desirable as they become smaller, or more functionally important as the systems they control vanish from sight. When the heat-source is invisible, its controls must morevisible than in the days when the tap accompa nied a large, conspicuous radiator; when the radio becomes no bigger than an ashtray, then there is clearly a chance that it will become the equivalent of art-pottery on a table in the office of the U.S. Ambassador to London there was recently a transistor radio in an elaborately hand-chased brass box, like an eighteenth-century clock mechanism.

The chances are, then, that the miniaturized product is going to demand attention with a hard, gem-like insistence, and focus attention as surely as the red button on which our atomic fate depends. And if it works by batteries, it may not be possible to fix its place on the domestic scene by a crafty location of power outlets. But the world of the miniaturized product is also the world of the visually sophisticated consumer, who may be susceptible to other forms of persuasion, may even, before long, be in a mental condition to seek architectural advice.

To sum up, the passing of the architect's claim to be the absolute master of the visual environment has not greatly reduced the area of his real responsibility at both the visual and functional levels. In fact, his responsibilities have increased—the stakes mark out a smaller claim, but he now has to dig all of it. The manner of implementing these responsibilities is not simply to assume control of the schools and expect everyone to accept architectural standards as the norm of judgment, as the theorists of the Thirties supposed, but to exercise choice and background control over the choice of others, to advise, suggest and demand on the basis of knowledge and understanding. Conceivably there may be less (here replaced by industrialized building) and by the Fine Arts. Although smail, the school proved extremely influential in the world of design, at least at the level of ideas. Its manner of designing is best known through the cabinet work of Braun electrical appliances, but it has so far produced no characteristic style of design. Rather it has become a cool training ground for a technocratic élite.

Volkswagen: Since the end of the second World War, the design of motor-cars has been in constant revolution, but the standard against which most cars have been judged and found wanting (not always justifiably) has been the Volkswagen. Clearly it is a car that has meant different things to different men, but the points on which its reputation is based, are primarily these: That it had, until recently and with very few exceptions, a more advanced technical specification than any other vehicle produced in quantity, and that spares and after-sales service set a standard of practical involvement with users, and their problems, that few other manufacturers could equal. But the overwhelming virtue in the eyes of men of liberal conscience was that in a world of automotive flux its appearance remained constant and that in a period when cars grew larger year by year, it remained the same size. In other words, it was a symbol of protest against standards of Detroit, the mass media and the 'pop' arts.

glory involved than in being able to sign one's name to everything as 'designer' but there may be more useful work done and better service rendered to the public. If that is so, then ten years of uncertainty and dispute will not have been in vain.

## NOTES

There was one exception only to this programme, the free-standing cupboard unit, which Le Corbusier had, in fact, designed as a prototype for manufacture by Thonet.

The Unité was originally designed to house the unfurnished proletariat.

Carbonorific

The recent destruction of the Euston Propylaeum and the forthcoming demolition of the London Coal Exchange have both aroused bad feelings—because they are/were buildings of too high a quality to be so lightly destroyed—and a great deal of bad blood—because the behaviour of Her Majesty's Ministers in both cases was highhanded, stupid, devious and disingenuous. But there the resemblances between the two cases end, for they are so dissimilar as to embody, as weli as any two buildings could, the extreme polarities covered by the term Early Victorian Architecture.

Hardwick's Propylaeum, completed in 1839, is very Early Victorian, and represents an important, doomed branch of cultural earnestness—an attempt to express a progressive theme, the London-Birmingham railway, in the idiom of an accepted high style of architecture, Greek Doric. The dichotomy between theme and idiom could be hardly more complete, for the structure served no operational railway function but merely gave monumental form to an impressive sentiment in the only reliably impressive monumental style then known. Functionless, it called for what is termed (wrongly) pure architecture, an exercice de style, to which Hardwick responded with a true classicist's

ne s  y on two outer walls with the columns framed between them. As an exercise in style it was faultess, but it was more than accurate. Its giant scale—oneand-a-half tmes the size of the Doric of the Parthenon—gave it a classic gravitas that grew daily more austere, commanding, as the soot settled blacker on the stone. One could say that it was more perfect even than the Parthenon: perfect in the strict sense of perfectus, completely finished or worked out, a mortuary perfection. The Coal Exchange, for all its plain errors of architectural taste, is a live birth. Lacking the unflappable classical authority of the Propylaeum it does not bring one up short with the spectacle of one of the great test-pieces of European civilization perfectly executed. It has the air of a grandiose fumble whose virtues impress only slowly and indirectly. In any case these virtues are concentrated in something that Hardwick was not called upon to provide—the interior. The outside is fairly routine Early Victorian subclassical: the facades to Lower Thames Street and St Mary-at-Hill are relaxed, not to say flabby in style.But theinside s a very different sory. The prime functional requirement that J. D. Bunning, the city's architect, had to answer was to provide a p, r trading-floor, surrounded by tiers of dealersoffices. Such a requirement is, presumably, constituent to a high capitalist culture, but only two buildings of High Capitalism managed to make architecture by answering this problem honestly. At the end of the period, Berlage's Beurs in Amsterdam framed a rectangular floor in massive brick galleries of studied austerity, completed after 1900. The other is Bunning's Coal Exchange at the beginning of the period, and a more noteworthy building on practically every count, for all that Bunning was not half the architect that Berlage could be. Bunning made his pit circular, with three galleries to serve the offices. At four equally spaced points around the circle the galleries are widened by breaking back ay more useful and sociable than just circulation runs, as well as providing access to y ar masy  ee ewhointer. e o aas n anewo The coluns, which are fat and rectangular in section, rseuninterrupted tobemaker's name, Dewer, in a fine bold lonic lettering, and the second sensational fact, the date—1848! Three years earlier than the Crystal Palace, the Coal Exchange will or he next few monts, the oldest urvivi metallic public space  Euroe, as well as one of the handsomest. Professor Hitchcock was inspired to compare it to La-

Bo e l inhesn .But whersssnlal aotjazz Bu a mentaly EarlyVictin allenge he de new syler ew ean ceu triumphantly with a complete repertoire of ad hoc, invented decoration based on the history, extraction and transport o coal. The balustradesf the galleries are looped and knotted with cast-iron hawsers, and the main structural members are plaited with the same motif; the occasional blank panels between columns are enlivened with painted trophies of carboniferous plants and personages; the four desks on the trading floor stand on legs of giant cast-iron fossil plants; there are sundry views of carboniferous places like Sunderland, and the ring of blank panels under the edge of the dome originally had giant paintings of tree-ferns by Melhado.

Had. The whole place now breathes the had-it atmosphere of a building disowned. Not that it lacks admirers—in this I am at one with the most gaga Betjemanites—but no one in authority can be bothered with it any longer. The Ministry of Housing and Local Government off-handedly condemned it to demolition without even the elementary courtesy of informing the Victorian Society that all three schemes for preserving the Exchange from the depredations of the Ministry of Transport had been turned down. The City Corporation, who had it built in the first place, don't seem to care whether it stands or falls, but have stated that it will be open to the public some time before its demolition, and that the opening will be fully publicized.

Knowing how these things tend to go, keep a weather ear open for a blast of publicity not unlike a distant civil servant uttering a deprecatory cough, and then rush to see it while you have the chance. The echo is tremendous and makes it an ideal place for shouting 'God rot Keith Joseph and Henry Brooke!'
