> 来源：A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham)\A Critic Writes Selected Essays by Reyner Banham (Centennial Books) (Reyner Banham).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Modern Monuments

In many an attempt to make learned (as opposed to common) sense of the new Lloyds Building, and other examples of High Tech architecture, one will read references to som mysterious Maison eVerre.But what "House o Glass" is eant Everody au tior nothing.Oris it perhaps a Platonic ideal; sme pure conetion  theultate glass box that has been trying to get itself built ever since Modernism came in?

Retrospectively it almost is just that—if you look for a comprehensive prototype for all the mechanistic romanticism and engineer-styling that comes with recent British High Tech buildings, you are liable to find yourself falling backwards through time until you soft-land in the late twenties, touching down in the Septième Arondissement of Paris, outside an uninformative gate in an equally anonymous standard Rive Gauche facade, where you have to address an electronic squawk box to be admitted.

Inside, you confront a wall of glass bricks set in concrete in a black steel frame at the back of a standard Paris-type courtyard, with two steel ladders flying up on either side, and some massive floodlamps carried on clever steel brackets. Even if you know y cy tt This isnot modern architecture as it is generally understood; not the moder a chitecture of Gropius, or Le Corbusier, yet it is unmistakably "modern" in its materials, its aesthetics, the kind of earnest life-style it implies.

It's as if its architects, the French Art-Deco superstar Pierre Chareau, and the Dutch modernist, Bernard Bijvoet, had invented an alternative Modernism to the one that is in all the books, and that is why the Maison isn't in those books; not in Giedion, not in Pevsner (which is probably why it isn't in Banham, either; I caught up with it later), not in Hitchcock, nor all those lay-person's "introductions" to modern architecture. It appears briefly in Tafuri's revisionist Modern Architecture, and in William Curtis's equally revisionist text under the same title. But—sensationally—it's not in Frampton's Modern Architecture; a Critical History, even though he has made himself the world expert on the house. Known and admired it is still "un-assimilated to the canon."

In a way, it almost threatens the canon, which is probably why it is so much in vogue at present. The interior, in particular, is not only a knockout, but it suggests even more forcibly than the façade how Modern might have been quite different. On the ground floor are doctor's consulting rooms but they are not in the standard chrome-and-glass iconography of Modernist hygiene; there's wood, and the metal is black. Everything is rational but different; sliding doors rotate on hidden pivots, screens concertina away on curved tracks.

From the consulting level you go upstairs—at a low angle on a light-metal open-riser staircase that is mounted on a hinge at the top and sliders at the bottom, with low hand-rails spread so wide that they seem intended only to catch you if you falloff!— and at the top you come into what must be one of the greatest rooms of the 20th cen-y  that wa bricks, which becomes a wallof light when seen from inside. Photographs make the r look ol ano arkheras healiy aellousy spacious in all directions.

The furniture is stolidly well-ade Art Deco wood, but everything else is strictly Machine Age. The originator rubber floor is stil in place and intact, though it looks its age; exposed steel columns rise through the space, jointed with dozens of hefty nuts and bolts—but partly clad in expensive marble! Electrical conduitry and switchgr el w but hemait artlaneat out of metal grilles in the floor and every cubic inch of wooden cabinet work is carried in skinny black metal framing that is a continuation of the handrails around balca staiAn is ll ila snheeal wa makrk I so  vebe properly made!

An l r cakearoun nd thehouse hat didn'  he cnon  decadeo ow heou upper floors.

Th antu— un hanhnt ar ' marauding architecture buffs.

This whole issue of public access to private dwellings that are monuments in the histyultuehyouo avBeorBa auut thea tis in he caseeMainVe:cnwork mine Modernism be historic, a monument? It is surely a contradiction f the ntentions and nature of Modernism for its products to stand around long enough to become monuments anyhow, even if some of the exhibits in the Museum of Modern Art in New York v d yars l! I sil  n fee wheevr wr lihemode tradiion"even thouh I know t tands or smething real, and I t that at least one of the reasons why we have been having the "crisis of modernism" that gets academics so excited at conferences is that we are faced with the problem of forcing a lot of anti-historical material into historical categories that it was deliberately designed not to fit.

The problem is worse when the monument in question is as private unto itself, as independent of the institutionalised movement of Modernism, as the Maison de Verre. You can see this clearly enough if you contrast its case with that of Weissenhof Siedlung, in the suburbs of Stuttgart. Built in 1927 as a public demonstration of modern housing, master-planned by Mies van de Rohe, it is not so much "assimilated to the canon," it is the canon. Its white-walled, flat-roofed buildings by Le Corbusier, Mies himself, Gropius, J. J. P. Oud, Peter Behrens and others, including mystery men like Mart Stam and rank expressionists like Hans Scharoun, represented the first major rally of modernist architects, the first all-modern community whose townscape one could walk about in.

This past summer, at my third visit, there was nothing casual, dis-regardful or bashed up about the Weissenhof scene as there had been when I first visited it after the war. The great German Kulturschutzmaschine has taken over; all is now neat and tidy, the buildings put back like 1927. All that saved it from being completely mummified and spooky was that the restoration work was not absolutely completed; the famous apartment block by Mies van de Rohe was only half done, and one could sneak into the unfinished parts where the crews were still at work, and see original structural steel exposed, original brass handrails, even original bath-room tiling, and those horizontal strip windows that still give such spectacular panoramic views over the ring of mountains that frames the city below.

What else saved it from being a total mausoleum was that people actually live in it,

hang ludicrous chandeliers in their living rooms, put cheerfully wrong curtains in the windows, hang surprisingly provocative underwear out to dry, and generally behave like living Volk. The effect, for me, was very strange; it is good to see quality buildings being given the upkeep they deserve but is the embalmed result modern any more? I think not unless you treat Modern as just another historical style, like Rococo or Flamboyant, which is very definitely not how any self-respecting modern architect, dead or alive, has ever regarded it. The problem seems worse in architecture than in the non-constructive arts—Finnegans Wake, for instance, has been procrusted into the canon of great literature it set out to mock rotten—but the persistence of the classic (oh?) monuments of architectural modernism is of a different order, and they defy "interpretation" in ways that other arts do not. Great works of architecture—and ancient ones tend to be as resistant as modern ones—seem to populate the history of western culture in a nonconforming mode and on a different time-scale that together make nonsense of the seamless web of "Zeitgeist." Impressionist painting, impressionist literature, impressionist music, even impressionist sculpture—but impressionist building? Only at the expense of voiding the word of usable meaning. Could it be the same with Modern, and that the "permanent masterpieces" of modern architecture operate under a different rule book in which the canon is almost irrelevant, so that the houses on the hill of Weissenhof can sit around being public, canonical and kulturgeschichtlich, and the Maison de Verre can go on being private, uncanonised and category-proof, without being any the less significant for being so unconformable? Or will the Maison de Verre turn out to be the basis of an alternative canon? More am nv to see i anyone else is paying attention. The usual format of the argument, made explicit in the catalogue f the massive exhibition Vision der Modere, das Prinz Konstruktion,at the DeutschesArchitektur Museum  Frankurt this year is that histianpropagandists of modern architecture got the Zeitgeist twisted, and propagandised a style (that was to become canonical) of closed volumes, simple geometrical forms and ace and the Eiffel Tower, that were open-work, complicated and less smooth than rugged. IHTec s ha ny  e n Ly ok y k ohelnheai pa eplemodenarhitecture tucai parntagBut ds eva make it a permanent monument, like, say, Stonehenge?
