> 来源：Creativity and Cultural Improvisation (Elizabeth Hallam Tim Ingold)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Creativity and Cultural Improvisation (Elizabeth Hallam Tim Ingold)\Creativity and Cultural Improvisation (Elizabeth Hallam Tim Ingold).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Creativity and Cultural Improvisation: An Introduction Tim Ingold and Elizabeth Hallam

There is no script or social and cultural lie. People have to work it out as they go along. In a word, they have to improvise. To introduce the themes of this volume, we want to make four points about improvisation. First, it is generative, in the sense that it gives rise to the phenomenal forms of culture as experienced by those who live by them or in accord with them. Second, it is relational, in that it is continually attuned and responsive to the performance of others. Third, it is temporal, meaning that it cannot be collapsed into an instant, or even a series of instants, but embodies a certain duration. Finally, improvisation is the way we work, not only in the ordinary conduct of our everyday lives, but also in our studied reflections on these lives in fields of art, literature and science. In the following paragraphs we expand on each of these points in turn.

Before we begin, however, we have an observation to make. The title of this volume, Creativity and Cultural Improvisation, was also that of the conference from which its chapters were drawn. Throughout the conference we heard a great deal about the concept of creativity. Its possible definitions, uses and abuses, and resonances in the contemporary world were discussed at length. The concept of improvisation, by contrast, was discussed hardly at all. Though slipped in every so often as a relatively unmarked term, it did not capture the attention of conference participants in the way that the concept of creativity did, nor was it perceived to be especially problematic or to call for the same degree of unpacking. Whereas 'creativity' appeared to conceal a cornucopia of meaning between its covers, 'improvisation' seemed like an open book.

Though this imbalance surprised us at the time, in retrospect the reasons for it are fairly obvious. As John Liep explains, introducing an earlier collection of anthropological papers on the topic, creativity is on everyone's lips these days. Apparently we cannot have enough of it (Liep 2001: 5)! In a global commodity market with an insatiable appetite for new things, where every aspect of life and art is convertible into an object of fascination or desire to be appropriated and consumed, creativity has come to be seen as a major driver of economic prosperity and social well-being. A quick glance through the list of recent books with 'creativity' in the title, in any library catalogue, will reveal that the majority are in the fields of business or organizational management, where creativity is seen as the key to commercial success, and in education, which is supposed to produce the kinds of creative individuals who will go on to succeed in a knowledge-based economy.

Anthropology, Liep argues, cannot escape the processes in which it is enmeshed, of cultural commoditization and the consequent aestheticization of everyday life. Thus it is no wonder that the preoccupation with creativity affects the life and thinking of anthropologists as much as everyone else (ibid.: 4). Indeed Liep himself swims with the current, along with his fellow contributors, in associating creativity with the production of novelty as opposed to the 'more conventional exploration of possibilities within a certain framework of rules' (ibid.: 2; see also Schade-Poulsen 2001: 106). For the former he uses the term innovation which he regards as a virtual synonym for creativity  while reserving the term improvisation for the latter. Though the improvisation that undoubtedly goes on everywhere and all the time in the course of quotidian life may appear to lend it a creative aspect, this, he tells us, is merely a 'conventional creativity', as distinct from the 'true creativity' that stands out here and there, marking unique moments of radical disjuncture. An anthropological approach to creativity, Liep contends, would do well to focus on the latter (ibid.: 12).

We disagree. In our view anthropology can best contribute to debates around creativity by challenging  rather than reproducing  the polarity between novelty and convention, or between the innovative dynamic of the present and the traditionalism of the past, that has long formed such a powerful undercurrent to the discourses of modernity. In this respect our approach comes closer to that of Edward Bruner, in his epilogue to a stillearlier collection of essays on anthropology and creativity. As Bruner observes, people everywhere 'construct culture as they go along and as they respond to life's contingencies' (Bruner 1993: 326). In this process they are compelled to improvise, not because they are operating on the inside of an established body of convention, but because no system of codes, rules and norms can anticipate every possible circumstance. At best it can provide general guidelines or rules of thumb whose very power lies in their vagueness or non-specificity. The gap between these non-specific guidelines and the specific conditions of a world that is never the same from one moment to the next not only opens up a space for improvisation, but also demands it, if people are to respond to these conditions with judgement and precision. 'Improvisation', as Bruner puts it, 'is a cultural imperative' (ibid.: 322).

The difference between improvisation and innovation, then, is not that the one works within established convention while the other breaks with it, but that the former characterizes creativity by way of its processes, the latter by way of its products. To read creativity as innovation is, if you will, to read it backwards, in terms of its results, instead of forwards, in terms of the movements that gave rise to them. This backwards reading, symptomatic of modernity, finds in creativity a power not so much of adjustment and response to the conditions of a world-information as of liberation from the constraints of a world that is already made. It is a reading that celebrates the freedom of the human imagination  in fields of scientific and artistic endeavour  to transcend the determinations of both nature and society. In this reading, creativity is on the side not only of innovation against convention, but also of the exceptional individual against the collectivity, of the present moment against the weight of the past, and of mind or intelligence against inert matter.

By harnessing our understanding of creativity to improvisation rather than innovation we propose a forward reading that would recover the productive processes that have been neglected in cultural studies due to their almost exclusive concentration on consumable products (Friedman 2001: 48). The improvisational creativity of which we speak is that of a world that is crescent rather than created; that is 'always in the making' (Jackson 1996: 4) rather than ready-made. Because improvisation is generative, it is not conditional upon judgements of the novelty or otherwise of the forms it yields. Because it is relational, it does not pit the individual against either nature or society. Because it is temporal, it inheres in the onward propulsion of life rather than being broken off, as a new present, from a past that is already over. And because it is the way we work, the creativity of our imaginative reflections is inseparable from our performative engagements with the materials that surround us. In all four respects our focus on improvisation challenges the backwards reading of modernity.

We consider each below: roughly speaking, they correspond respectively to the themes of the four parts of this book. Then, in the penultimate section of this introductory chapter, we place alternative forward and backwards readings of creativity in their context in the history of ideas, showing how, following their long co-existence, the rise of modernity tipped the balance towards the latter. Finally and briefly, we map out the overall thematic structure of the volume as a whole, leaving it to the authors of separate introductions for each part to discuss the chapters it includes in more detail.

## Improvisation is Generative

A famous modern architect designs a building, the like of which the world has never seen before. He is celebrated for his creativity. Yet his design will get no further than the drawing board or portfolio until the builders step in to implement it. Building is not straightforward. It takes time, during which the world will not stop still: when the work is complete the building will stand in an environment that could not have been envisioned when it started. It takes materials, which have properties of their own and are not predisposed to fall into the shapes and configurations required of them, let alone to stay in them indefinitely. And it takes people, who have to make the most of their own skill and experience in order to cajole the materials into doing what the architect wants. In order to accommodate the inflexible design to the realities of a fickle and inconstant world, builders have to improvise all the way. There is a kink, as Stewart Brand writes, between the world and the architect's idea of it: 'The idea is crystalline, the fact fluid' (Brand 1994: 2). Builders inhabit that kink.

Why, then, do we not celebrate the creativity of their work, as we do that of the architect? And why, for that matter, do we not celebrate equally the creativity of those who subsequently use the building in the course of their own lives? For the reality is that no building remains  as the architect might wish  forever unchanged, but has to be continually modified and adapted to fit in with manifold and ever-shifting purposes. At the same time it is constantly buffeted by the elements, the forces of wear and tear, and the visitations of birds, rodents, arachnids and fungi, all calling for the equally improvisatory interventions of workmen of diverse trades  plumbers, joiners, window cleaners, roofing specialists and a host of others  merely in order to shore it up against the tide of destruction. Do they not also, along with inhabitants' efforts to do-it-themselves, play their part in the building's ongoing creation? As the distinguished Portuguese architect Alvaro Siza admits, he has never been able to design, let alone build a real house, by which he means 'a complicated machine in which every day something breaks down' (Siza 1997: 47).

A rather similar puzzle emerges if we turn from artificially built structures to organically grown ones. Wherever life is going on, solid, liquid and gaseous materials are binding in the formation of stupendously complex, organic tissues. Human beings are as much caught up in this process as creatures of any other kind. What can be more creative than the growth of a human infant  'knit together', in the wonderfully poetic words of the biblical psalm (cited by Jeanette Edwards, this volume), in its mother's womb? Most biologists, however, are remarkably reluctant to acknowledge the creativity of organic life. They are understandably nervous that any admission of creativity would attract charges of creationism. If they speak of creativity at all, it is with regard to the origin and diversification of species, that is, to evolutionary phylogeny rather than ontogenetic development. Evolution, they point out, is a result of natural selection, and the first thing to understand about natural selection is that it explains how creativity can occur in a world of living things, in the absence of a creator.

But if we pause to inquire what has been created, the answer turns out to be not the organism itself but a design for the organism, supposedly encoded in the materials of heredity. Indeed one of the ironies of the current spat between Darwinian evolutionary biologists and the advocates of so-called 'intelligent design' is that if there is one thing that both sides take for granted, it is that such design exists, at the heart of every organism and expressed in its development. The issue at stake is merely whether the intelligence of this design is that of Science reflected in the mirror of nature, or of Theodicy reflected in the mirror of God. Only a hair's breadth separates the two positions. Either way, it is assumed that organic form issues directly and unproblematically from the pre-created design. To account for the form, all you have to do is to 'read back' to the design of which it is supposed to be the expression, albeit modulated by environmental circumstances. And just as with the building, what this leaves out are the myriad tactical improvisations by which actual living organisms co-opt whatever possibilities their environments may afford to make their ways in the tangle of the world. Neither natural selection nor an intelligent designer can build a real organism, any more than the modern architect can build a real house.

The belief that in the building of a house or the growth of an organism  or more generally, in the activities by which living beings of all kinds, human and non-human, sustain themselves in their environments  nothing is created that was not designed in advance, pre-existing in virtual form the processes that give rise to it, is deeply rooted in modern thought. It is this belief that leads us to look to innovations in design as the source of all creation. We are inclined to say that something is created only when it is new, meaning not that it has been newly produced, but that it is the manifest outcome of a newly concocted plan, formula, programme or recipe. Everything else is a copy. Notwithstanding the effort, attention and even problem-solving that goes into reproducing an existing model, the process of copying  by this logic  cannot be creative. It can only replicate what is already there. A fundamental opposition is thereby set up between creativity and imitation. We challenge this opposition, as do many of the contributions to this book.

Copying or imitation, we argue, is not the simple, mechanical process of replication that it is often taken to be, of running off duplicates from a template, but entails a complex and ongoing alignment of observation of the model with action in the world. In this alignment lies the work of improvisation. The formal resemblance between the copy and the model is an outcome of this process, not given in advance. It is a horizon of attainment, to be judged in retrospect. Indeed the more strictly standards are observed, the greater are the improvisational demands placed on performers to 'get it right'. Precision  as Felicia Hughes-Freeland shows in her study of Javanese dance, and Fuyubi Nakamura in her account of Japanese calligraphy  demands a heightened responsiveness which, for practitioners who are truly skilled, can be truly liberating. That is why there is creativity even and especially in the maintenance of an established tradition. Just as a building that is not kept in repair soon disintegrates, so traditions have to be worked at to be sustained. The continuity of tradition is due not to its passive inertia but to its active regeneration  in the tasks of carrying on.

For this reason the metaphor of transmission has to be used with great care. In a loose sense we can of course speak of generations passing on their skills and knowledge to successors. There has been a tendency, however, to interpret the metaphor much more literally, as though in the performance of tradition people do not so much emulate their predecessors by copying their actions, as act out, or 'convert into behaviour', prototypical schemas that have already been copied into their heads by a prior process of replication (Sperber 1996: 61). Some anthropologists and psychologists have even taken to calling these schemas 'memes', information-bearing nodules that are supposed to inhabit the mind as genes inhabit the body, whence they control the carrier's thought and behaviour. Creativity, for meme-theorists, lies not in what people do but in the potential for mutation and recombination of its memetic determinants (Aunger 2000). However, just as natural selection can no more build a real organism than can an architect build a real house, so no amount of meme-juggling, intentional or otherwise, can build a real human being. Real people, as the living organisms they are, continually create themselves and one another, forging their histories and traditions as they go along.

## Improvisation is Relational

We are talking here about the process of social life. By this we mean the life of persons in those mutually constitutive relationships through which, as they grow older together, they continually participate in each other's coming-into-being. We do not mean the life of some hypostatized, superorganic entity  namely 'society' as it unfolds over and above that of the solitary individual. It is this latter view that, in classical social theory, sets the freedom of the individual on a collision course with the external determinations of society, and it is reproduced every time the exercise of creativity is associated with individual talent and expression.

The creative individual, it is commonly supposed, is one who is prepared and able to make a break with socially imposed convention. This can sometimes lead to the paradoxical results that Judith Scheele observes in her study of the political rhetoric of revolution in Algeria. For where collective identity is defined by revolutionary commitment, the only way to swim against the tide is by adherence to tradition! It can be unconventional to be conventional, just as it can be traditional to change. Even the most creative of individuals, by this account, can never fully escape what Friedman (2001) has called the 'iron cage' of social constraint, since their nonconformity  if it is not to be dismissed as mere idiosyncrasy  must 'make sense' within a more widely inhabited universe of meaning and accord with its communicative conventions. Creativity, as Kirsten Hastrup points out in this volume, cannot totally cut loose from the social whole, lest it register as madness.

In this imagined tussle between individual and society, the stature of the former appears proportional to the gravitas of the latter. It takes a giant to move a mountain, and it is generally assumed that since society is a totality of an altogether larger scale than the individuals that make it up, no ordinary person can shift it. That is why creative individuals tend to be credited with extraordinary powers, of intellect or charisma. In his epilogue to Creativity/Anthropology, to which we have already referred, Bruner goes some way towards reducing the deadweight of society, and by the same token, recognising that 'even little people in the routine and everyday' can change the world (Bruner 1993: 321). The assumption nevertheless remains that in the 'mix of tradition and change' (Rosaldo, Lavie and Narayan 1993: 5), creativity is about change, and moreover that its source lies with the agency of the individuals who initiate it, as against the inertia of tradition induced by social conditioning. It is precisely this assumption that we seek to challenge.

Following a tradition, as we have shown, is a matter not of replicating a fixed pattern of behaviour, but of carrying on from predecessors. Social life is a task, and for those engaged in it the overriding concern is to keep going, rather than coming to a dead end or becoming caught in a loop of ever-repeating cycles. There is no opposition here between continuity and change: rather, change is what we observe if we look back over the ground covered, comparing a present state of affairs with those of select points in the past (Ingold 2000: 147). The forward movement of keeping life going, however, can involve a good measure of creative improvisation, not unlike that required of pedestrians on a busy street who have continually to negotiate a path through what Michel de Certeau (1984: xviii xix) would call tactical manoeuvrings  that is, through those improvisational adjustments of posture, pace and bearing by which one's own movement is attuned on the one hand to that of companions with whom one wishes to keep abreast or in file, and on the other to strangers coming from different directions with whom one does not wish to collide (Lee and Ingold 2006: 7982). Nor is this attunement limited to human others, for it must also take account of non-human presences of all sorts, both mobile and stationary. There is no reason, as Vokes points out in this volume (after Latour 1993), to limit the scope of social life to human actants.

Improvisation is relational, then, because it goes on along 'ways of life' that are as entangled and mutually responsive as are the paths of pedestrians on the street. And by the same token, the creativity it manifests is not distributed among all the individuals of a society as an agency that each is supposed to possess a priori an internal capacity of mind to come up with intentions and to act upon them, causing effects in the vicinity (Gell 1999: 1617)  but rather lies in the dynamic potential of an entire field of relationships to bring forth the persons situated in it.

We find a precedent for this view in the writings of the theologian H.N. Wieman. It is necessary, Wieman writes, to distinguish two senses of creativity: 'One is a characteristic doing of the human person. The other is what personality undergoes but cannot do'. A human being is creative in the first sense 'when he constructs something according to a new design which has already come within reach of his imagination .. The second kind of creativity is what progressively creates personality in community' (Wieman 1961: 656, our emphasis).

Now in the first sense, the meanings of creativity and agency coincide in the notion of the 'doing' of the person. However, the creativity of social life, we contend, has to be understood in Wieman's second sense. As one of us has argued elsewhere, 'social life is not something the person does but rather what the person undergoes'  a process in which people 'do not make societies but, living socially, make themselves' (Ingold 1986: 247). Another way of saying that people make themselves is to say they not only grow but are also grown, in that they undergo histories of development and maturation within fields of relationships established through the presence and activities of others (Ingold 2000: 144). Critically, this growth is not just in strength and stature, but also in knowledge, in the work of the imagination and the formation of ideas. The latter is, after all, as much a fullbodied knitting together of materials and experience as the former.

Returning to the analogy with the pedestrian wayfarer, every idea is like a place you visit. You may arrive there along one or several paths, and linger for a while before moving on, perhaps to circle around and return some time later. Each time you revisit the idea it is a little different, enriched by the memories and experience of your previous stay. Leading others along the same pathways, you may also share the idea with them, though again, as each brings along the particularities of their own previous experience, it will not be quite the same for one individual as for anyone else. But there would be no ideas, just as there would be no places, were it not for the movements of people towards, around and away from them. Only when we look back, searching for antecedents for new things, do ideas appear as the spontaneous creations of an isolated mind encased in a body, rather than way stations along the trails of living beings, moving through a world.

Perhaps that is how we might have viewed the creativity of the fictitious architect, introduced in the last section, who has produced a design for a revolutionary new building. His design would exemplify what the philosopher and psychologist Margaret Boden, a pioneer in the study of artificial intelligence, calls a 'creative idea'. There are two senses, she writes, in which ideas can be deemed creative. One sense is psychological, the other historical, and she calls them P-creative and H-creative for short. Basically, an idea is P-creative when it is fundamentally novel with respect to the mind of the individual who had it. It is H-creative when it is novel with respect to the whole of human history (Boden 1990: 32). Thus our architect, having produced a totally unprecedented design, could claim to be H-creative. This is not a claim, however, to the effect that his design took shape within the historical current of social life, or through any such worldly engagements. To the contrary, it is a claim to total independence from any external influence whatever! Social relations and historical engagements, in Boden's world, have a bearing only on the dissemination and recognition of ideas, not on their origination. In coming up with creative ideas it seems that every mind is on its own, effectively cut off from the world of persons, objects and relations in which it necessarily subsists. As Boden states, quite categorically, 'the mind's creations must be produced by the mind's resources' (ibid.: 29).

Even architects, however, are human beings. They move in the same circles as those who walk the streets of the cities they have helped to design. And it is surely in these movements, not in splendid isolation, that their ideas take shape. For the mind, as Andy Clark has observed, is a notoriously 'leaky organ' that refuses to stay inside the skull, but shamelessly mingles with the body and the world in the conduct of its operations, turning whatever it finds there into resources for the solution of its own problems (Clark 1997: 53; see Ingold 2001: 138). Thus, far from being a strategic planner, aloof from the material world upon which its designs are inscribed, the mind is in practice a hotbed or tactical and relational improvisation. As it mingles with the world, the mind's creativity is inseparable from that of the total matrix of relations in which it is embedded and into which it extends, and whose unfolding is constitutive of the process of social life.

## Improvisation is Temporal

According to what might be called the 'traditional view of tradition', its enactment is rather like the derivation of a sequence of numbers from the iteration of a basic formula. As the formula is passed down from generation to generation as part of a schema or code of conduct, so its recipients are destined to replicate the same sequence. Against this background, creative innovations stand out like prime numbers: they resist decomposition into already existing ideas or entities just as prime numbers cannot be divided by any integers other than themselves. This parallel is suggested by the art historian George Kubler (1962: 39), in an essay in which he attempts to link the distinction between the conventional outcomes of routine, traditional performance and the novel products of creative design to the perception of time and history.

Our actual perception of time depends on regularly recurrent events, unlike the awareness of history, which depends upon unforeseeable change and variety. Without change there is no history; without regularity there is no time. Time and history are related as rule and variation: time is the regular setting for the vagaries of history. (ibid.: 712)

Thus the replications of tradition, endlessly repeated, belong to time; the novelties of invention, each a one-off, belong to history.

Time, in this view, is not creative; it brings nothing forth. Rather, what has once been brought forth, through a unique historical event of creation, ultimately sinks back into time through its subsequent replication. The first house to be built from the design of our revolutionary architect, for example, marks a historical moment, but the hundredth has already faded into the backdrop of time against which a succession of other inventions make their entrance (Ingold 1986: 340). Thus history is configured as a sequence of creative innovations, cast upon the ground of the repetition of their antecedents. Though new things can turn out to be longlasting, they are dated to their first appearance, and vanish from history as soon as the present-day of this appearance has fallen back into the past and the novelty of their impact has worn off. They become old: no longer of the present, they mark past time. The same can happen to people too, as Cathrine Degnen shows in this volume. 'Old people' are deemed to belong to time and not to history: we celebrate their anniversaries but do not expect them to do anything except repeat themselves, even in contexts that demand otherwise. Their moment is past, and the past is over, finished.

The notion that once they cease to be 'new', persons and things can no longer be deemed creative or have any bearing on what comes to pass, is a corollary of the backwards reading that judges creativity by the innovativeness of its results rather than by the improvisations that went into the processes of producing them. Why should building the hundredth house be any less creative than building the first, even if the design remains unchanged? To be sure, some procedures may have become routine, but as the world will not stand still the challenge remains of accommodating a fixed plan to a fluid reality. Or more generally, nothing that people (or indeed, other organisms) do ever exactly repeats. No repeating system in the living world can be perfect, and it is precisely because imperfections in the system call for continual correction that all repetition involves improvisation. That is why life is rhythmic rather then metronomic, for the essence of rhythm, as the philosopher Henri Lefebvre has shown in his essay on Rhythmanalysis, lies in the 'movements and differences within repetition', rather than in repetition per se (Lefebvre 2004: 90).

Whereas innovation, in the backwards reading of creativity, lies outside of time, improvisation, in a forward reading, is inherently temporal. This is a time, however, that is not marked out by the oscillations of a perfectly repeating system such as a clock or metronome, or by the revolutions of the planets, but one that is lived and felt in the pulsating rhythms of life itself. Though it is a linear time, its linearity is of a particular kind. It is not the kind of line that goes from point to point, connecting up a succession of present instants arrayed diachronically as locations in space might be arrayed synchronically. It is rather a line that grows, issuing forth from its advancing tip rather like a root or creeper probes the earth. More than any other philosopher, we owe our understanding of this sense of time, as duration, to Henri Bergson. 'Our duration', Bergson wrote, 'is not merely one instant replacing another; if it were, there would never be anything but present no prolonging of the past in the actual . . . Duration is the continuous progress of the past which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances' (Bergson 1911: 45).

For Bergson, then, growing older is not the falling back of an already completed, uniquely historical being into time  as the sand falls back into an upended hourglass (ibid.: 18)  but the advance of time itself as it brings forth being in an ongoing generative movement that, since it is open-ended and never complete, is carried on rather than replicated by generations following. Thus the past, far from being set off against the present as a repository of finished business, is continually active in the present, pressing against the future. In this pressure lies the work of memory, imagined not as a register or drawer in which records of past events are filed away, but as the guiding hand of a consciousness that, as it goes along, also remembers the way. 'There is no register, no drawer . . . In reality, the past ... follows us at every instant; all that we have felt, thought and willed from our earliest infancy is there, leaning over the present that is about to join it, pressing against the portals of consciousness that would fain leave it outside' (ibid.: 5).

What Bergson is describing here is the duration of a consciousness that is improvisatory: guided by the past but not determined by it; heading into a future that is essentially unforeseeable. Only when we look back over the ground covered do we account for our actions as the step-by-step realization of plans or prior intentions, as though for every act there was a novel intention that precisely anticipated its outcome. What this account offers is a retrospective reconstruction of conduct that breaks the forward movement of consciousness into a succession of fragments, each initiated by a wilfully creative (or innovative) act of design followed by its determined execution (Ingold 1986: 210). In this backwards reading, the concrete line that 'goes along' and grows as it advances, is replaced by an abstract geometry of linear connections between points that are already given before the journey begins. Such, argued Bergson, is the perspective of the intellect, 'whose eyes are ever turned to the rear' (Bergson 1911: 49).

Our argument that creativity is a process that living beings undergo as they make their ways through the world carries a corollary of capital importance. It is that this process is going on, all the time, in the circulations and fluxes of the materials that surround us and indeed of which we are made  of the earth we stand on, the water that allows it to bear fruit, the air we breathe, and so on. These materials are life-giving, and their movements, mixtures and bindings are creative in themselves. The ancients knew this when they derived the term 'material' from mater, meaning 'mother' (Allen 1998: 177). And they knew, too, that even the generation of ideas involves sweat, blood and tears when they extended the meaning of the verb to 'conceive' from the development of an embryo in the womb to that of ideas in the mind.' But by the same token, creativity is not a faculty of the disembodied mind, as it is taken to be in most psychological treatments of the subject, whose designs are actively imposed upon a world of matter that is effectively dead. Indeed the idea that the mind's creations figure against the ground of a material world that is lifeless and inert is a product of exactly the same backwards reading that, as we have seen, sets the innovations of the present over against the dead weight of the past.

## Improvisation is the Way we Work

We began with the assertion that there is no script for social and cultural life. But there are most certainly scripts within it. In our capacity as ethnographers, we write, and so  as Robey Callahan and Trevor Stack point out in this volume  do advertising copywriters and authors of fiction. Though these kinds of writing, with the possible exception of advertisements, do not tell people exactly what they should do, there are plenty of other examples of scripts that do. More or less explicit instructions abound. They may be variously notated: writing is just one of many possibilities that also include signs, diagrams and the notational systems used for music and dance. Indeed it might be objected that our initial assertion is unjustified: that lives are scripted, at least to some extent, and therefore that people do not have to improvise all the time. Have we not been led, by a faulty initial premise, to exaggerate the importance of improvisation?

We believe not. Our claim is not just that life is unscripted, but more fundamentally, that it is unscriptable. Or to put it another way, it cannot be fully codified as the output of any system of rules and representations. This is because life does not pick its way across the surface of a world where everything is fixed and in its proper place, but is a movement through a world that is crescent. To keep on going, it has to be open and responsive to continually changing environmental conditions. A system that was strictly bound to the execution of a pre-composed script would be unable to respond and would be thrown off course by the slightest deviation. This, indeed, is the typical predicament of the novice in any craft who has, of necessity, first to learn by the rules. Fluent response calls for a degree of precision in the coordination of perception and action that can only be achieved through practice. But it is this, rather than a knowledge of the rules, that distinguishes the skilled practitioner from the novice. And in this, too, we find the essence of improvisation.

The theorist of design, David Pye, has distinguished between two kinds of workmanship, respectively of 'risk' and 'certainty'. In the workmanship of risk the quality of the outcome depends at every moment on the exercise of care, judgement and dexterity. The practitioner has continually to make fine adjustments to keep on course, in response to a sensitive monitoring of the conditions of the task as it unfolds. Throughout the work there is an ever-present risk that it will go awry and that the result will be spoiled. The workmanship of certainty, by contrast, proceeds by way of a pre-planned series of operations, each of which is mechanically constrained to the extent that the result is predetermined and outside the operative's control. He cannot alter course in mid-flow, but must stop, alter the settings of the apparatus, and start again. The pure form of the workmanship of certainty, of course, would be full automation (Pye 1968: 45). To exemplify the contrast, Pye compares handwriting and printing. It is an example worth following up.

In writing with a pen, nothing guides the tip save the movement of the hand and fingers with their characteristic penhold. The line rendered on paper is the trace of an ongoing gestural improvisation. Though we may have been taught the 'correct' ways to form letters by copying models, a person's handwriting is as distinctive and recognizable an aspect of their being, as it issues forth into the world, as is their voice. 'Writing is more than a means of communication', observes handwriting specialist Rosemary Sassoon, 'it is oneself on paper' (Sassoon 2000: 103). As Elizabeth Cory-Pearce points out in this volume, the handwritten text of archival documents is a tangible and relatively durable manifestation of the presence of identifiable persons. This personal style is not planned or designed, but emerges through a history of improvisation, above all in finding ways to connect letters in the cursive script in the interests of speed and efficiency. In 'joined-up' writing we fashion the joins, each in our own way, as we go along. Most writers of English, for example, when they write the word the, eventually find themselves running the cross of the t into the following h, despite having been taught that the join should be formed from the loop at the bottom of the first letter (Sassoon 2000: 4050).

There is, in short, no script for script. Even the hand of the traditional scribe, trained through a more rigorous discipline in the art of beautiful writing, has to find its own way. It would indeed be a mistake, as Karin Barber emphasizes in the next chapter, to suppose that a disciplined performance that strains after the perceived perfection of its model is any less improvisatory than one that celebrates the leeway of performers to follow any path they choose. Citing from the work of the music psychologist Nicholas Cook (1990: 113), Barber observes that a classical musician who plays from a score improvises just as much as a jazz musician who does not. The difference lies in their aims. The former is, as it were, centripetal, aiming for the bull's eye; the latter centrifugal, seeking to cast wide. This same variation, from the centripetal to the centrifugal, can be discerned in many other fields of performance, such as calligraphy, dance and athletics. One has only to compare archery with shot-putting!

But it is perhaps in the art of walking that we find closest parallel to handwriting. For although walking can be analysed into discrete steps, as handwriting into discrete letters, in the actual practice of walking, steps do not follow one another like beads on a string, any more than do the letters of writing. Rather, each is simultaneously a following-through of the one before and a preparation for the one following. Their order is processional rather than successional (Ingold 2006a: 67). But the same is true of any other skilled practice involving rhythmically repeated movements. One may learn the practice as a string of beads, as John Gatewood (1985) showed in his classic study of learning the ropes on board a fishing vessel, but proficiency lies in being able to run operations together  to move through them with the fluency of a dancer instead of executing each in a linear series of point-to-point connections. 'Rather than speaking of ideas, concepts, categories and links', Gatewood suggests, 'we should think of flows, contours, intensities and resonances' (Gatewood 1985: 216). Precisely the same point emerges from Hughes-Freeland's study, in this volume, of Javanese dance. Though the dance is explained to novices as a punctuated sequence of prescribed steps, the aesthetic aim is to emulate the ceaseless movement of flowing water.

Let us now return to printing, which Pye compared to handwriting as a workmanship of certainty rather than risk. In this case, surely, the order of letters is successional; they follow one another as discrete entities. Moreover both their shapes and their sequence are predetermined, the first by the engraving of the type, the second by the work of the compositor who sets it. Has the development of printing, then, reduced the scope of improvisation in the world of letters? Pye's answer is that it has not; it has simply moved it forward. For there is no doubt that engraving and typesetting are instances of the workmanship of risk, both  if anything  requiring even more care, judgement and dexterity than handwriting itself. Once again, this is a point that applies more generally. As the historian François Sigaut has shown, the story of technology is one of constantly renewed attempts to codify skilled practice and to build machines that would embody these codes in the principles of their operation. Yet these attempts chase an everreceding target, for as fast as skills are incorporated by technology into mechanical devices, new skills develop around the machines themselves (Sigaut 1994: 446). So universally is this the case that Sigaut feels justified in referring to the 'law of the irreducibility of skills'.

Our claim, fully consistent with Sigaut's law, is that the improvisational creativity of skilled practice is foundational to the way we work. This does not mean, however, that life is unpredictable. Predictability, as we have seen, is a hallmark of the workmanship of certainty. And unpredictability, conversely, is often taken to be of the essence of creativity. Boden, for example, links unpredictability explicitly to what she calls the 'surprise-value' of creativity (Boden 1990: 227). But this is to look back on the creative process, finding results considered so innovative that they cannot be explained by their antecedent conditions. We may indeed be surprised when things do not turn out as predicted, and science  on the principle of conjecture and refutation  has even turned its record of predictive failure into a history of advance. Improvisation, however, augurs no surprise for the simple reason that it does not endeavour to predict (Ingold 2006b: 1819). To borrow a formulation by which Pierre Bourdieu (1977: 95) characterized the generative capacity of the habitus, the improvisation of the way we work is 'as remote from a creation of unpredictable novelty as it is from a simple mechanical reproduction of the initial conditionings'. Its aim is not to project future states, but to follow the paths along which such projections take shape. Far from attempting to bring closure to the world, or to tie up loose ends, improvisation makes the most of the multiple possibilities they afford for keeping life going. For the world will not be closed, and goes its own way regardless of what we may have to say about it. The creativity of this world may be a source of perpetual astonishment, and indeed  as we show below  of wonder, but so long as we do not pretend to control it or to hold it to account, it occasions no surprise.

## Histories of Creativity, Creativities in History

So far we have focused on the ways in which the idea of creativity enters contemporary discussions of making and doing things, of innovation and tradition, and of the generativity of social and cultural processes. Most of the chapters in this book do indeed situate 'creativity' in its present-day settings, reflecting on currents of lived time and on lifetimes. However, the idea itself has a past, and several of our contributing authors also allude to longer-term histories that reveal the ways in which it has emerged and the transformations it has undergone. Eric Hirsch and Sharon Macdonald, for example, relate changing connotations of creativity to conceptions of the individual and of identity from the seventeenth century onwards, while James Leach considers the implications of the link between creativity and property that was established in eighteenth-century European and American political philosophy. Moreover, granted that creativity as we have already argued  is inherently temporal, its unfolding in time has to be grounded in deeper historical processes. As Wendy James and David Mills explain, introducing a volume resulting from the 2002 ASA conference on Time and Society, the flow of human action is always part of the 'flow of history' (James and Mills 2005: 2). This is not to deny that social and cultural change occurs, or that it may be marked by radical breaks with the past. The point, as James and Mills argue, is that the relationships between ongoing lived time and what comes to be retrospectively constituted as history are not given. They require analysis.

As we have already noted, Western views of creativity are associated with modernity, allowing Liep (2001), for instance, to link intensified interest in forms of creativity with economic changes that assign high value to innovation in the production of new commodities. In the context of 'late modernity' Liep defines creativity as a form of 'cross-fertilization' that occurs with the 'fusion of disparate cultural configurations' (ibid.: 12). Creativity and improvisation have also been interpreted as modes of response to rapid social and technological change associated with 'modernization' in different contexts (for example, Volkman 1994). More specifically, the idea of creativity as a unique faculty that human beings 'have', namely a capacity to create, appears to have come into common usage from the early to mid-twentieth century onwards (Kristeller 1983; Pope 2005). Yet these latter-day notions of creativity have not come from nowhere, but are rooted in much older ideas about creation and what it means to be creative (see Pope 2005).

In his Introduction to Part I of this volume, Ingold contrasts two notions of creativity that can be discerned in early twentieth-century philosophical works. It may be understood, on the one hand, as the production of novelty through the recombination of already extant elements, or on the other, as a process of growth, becoming and change. The former view posits the world as an assemblage of discrete parts; the latter as a continuous movement or flow. Both these formulations of creativity, however, can be traced historically to earlier understandings of novelty, seen in conceptions  not necessarily opposed or mutually exclusive  both of the assemblage of parts and of more fluid processes of coming-into-being. In what follows we place these formulations in the context of medieval views, before turning to early modern as well as more recent conceptions of creativity. Our aim is to show that while both forward and backwards readings of creativity, as growing emergence and produced novelty, have coexisted throughout the history of European ideas, their balance eventually shifted decisively towards the latter.

We can begin by returning to the notion of wonder. For medieval people, as Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park have shown in their study of the history of this notion from the twelfth to the eighteenth century, wonder was situated 'between the known and the unknown' (Daston and Park 2001: 13). In this respect it was an apprehension of novelty, of the unexpected, which also arose out of an acknowledged 'ignorance of cause' (ibid.: 23). Wonder was associated with what were perceived to be rare phenomena that were unfamiliar in relation to customary or everyday experience. Medieval catalogues of wonders embraced a rich assortment of entities, from magnets to werewolves. In travel writing and maps novelty and variety were located in what were seen as the margins of the world. Thus thirteenth-century maps depicting Europe, the Mediterranean and the Holy Land at the centre also positioned Africa and Asia at the periphery, and it was here that wonders such as the winged salamander and humans with one leg (Sciopodes) or no head (Blemmyes) were thought to gather. Daston and Park (2001: 25) quote one source as claiming that 'at the farthest reaches of the world often occur new marvels and wonders, as though Nature plays with greater freedom secretly at the edges of the world'. These wonders were characterized by their composition, with parts missing or exaggerated, or with parts rearranged to produce what were sometimes appreciated and at other times denigrated as 'monstrous' creatures.

Novelty as recombination was also found in the hybrid animal-human figures with which many medieval and early modern writings were illustrated. These comprised disparate elements such as a human body and a dog's head. Drawings of such combinatory creatures, such as the fish-man, were often inserted in the margins of medieval manuscripts (Camille 1992). The 'exotic races' at the edge of the world, however, were perceived to differ crucially from the individual 'monsters' that emerged in Europe. The former were supposed to have been generated by nature; the latter by the intervention of divine will. These monsters, moreover, were interpreted negatively as omens from God of future unwelcome happenings. Though, in the Judeo-Christian view, God had created the universe, in the twelfth century nature was not absolutely tied to divine command, but was rather thought to possess 'an independent internal order located in the chains of causes that produced particular phenomena' (Daston and Park 2001: 49). Wonders in the form of rare and novel combinations of parts were created, then, through the agency of nature and of God.

The rearrangement of components present in God's creations and in the playfulness of nature was also a feature of human works. Camille points out that 'the medieval artist's ability was measured not in terms of invention, as today, but in the capacity to combine traditional motifs in new and challenging ways' (Camille 1992: 36). The compositions illuminating the borders of manuscripts, for instance, would newly gloss, undermine or mock written texts with drawings, often taken from pattern-books, of already familiar figures such as monkeys and snails. Novelty in these manuscripts therefore worked through supplementation as well as through the juxtaposition of elements. It also operated through extensions and flows wherein the flourishes of letters would merge with creatures and other motifs.

A similar appreciation of combinatory and heterogeneous assemblages was registered in early modern cabinets of curiosities that displayed wonders in the form of naturalia, the products of nature, and artificialia, the products of human contriving. At the turn of the seventeenth century the Aristotelian opposition of nature and art still held, and in this construal the things constituted by nature possessed motion or an 'innate impulse to change', whereas the products of art did not (Daston and Park 1998: 264). Furthermore, whereas God was regarded as the 'supreme artisan of all natural forms', human designers often sought to imitate or to 'ape' natural wonders (Kemp 1995: 178). In the objects of wonder displayed in cabinets, the natural and the artificial were brought together, intricately interwoven and fused. Natural products provided the impetus for human designs, for example in the work of embellishing and amplifying the contours of shells that were incorporated into gold settings to form goblets. Such objects were identifiably 'compound ensembles', but they also sometimes erased distinctions between art and nature  in their appearance rather than in the mode of their formation (ibid.: 183). In this respect high value was placed on verisimilitude, and 'creative fantasy' was subordinated to the 'technical virtuosity of mimesis' (Daston and Park 2001: 284). Novelty in the form of recombination was joined by wonders in the form of copies.

Medieval and early modern understandings of wonder and novelty, as forms of recombination and assemblage of disparate elements, were not necessarily distinct from those that emphasized emergence through flows and growth. This is attested, for example, by Bakhtin's (1984 [1965]) analysis of medieval European popular culture and folk humour. Central to popular cultural forms, especially carnival, was the imagery of grotesque realism that rejected the notion of finished forms, be they animal, vegetable or human, and presented these not in a static world, but in terms of their movement, blending and merging. Thus 'the grotesque image reflects a phenomenon in transformation, an as yet unfinished metamorphosis, of death and birth, growing and becoming' (ibid.: 24). One of the central grotesque images was that of the open human body which was blended with other bodies, with animals and objects: this was an 'ever unfinished, ever creating body' (ibid.: 26). And among the principal sources for this grotesque conception of the body was the very tradition of wonders, with its hybrid figures of mixed parts, which we have already described. Thus in the medieval popular imagery of the grotesque we find a fusion rather than a division between the combinatorial assembly of hybrid forms and the processual generation of a world of movement and becoming.

The classical aesthetics of the Renaissance, however, brought a shift of emphasis in conceptions of the body, away from principles of flux and generativity, towards a notion of the completed, clearly bounded body of the individual separated from the world. As Stallybrass and White (1986) have shown, the canon of the classical body, with stable boundaries, underwrote the formation of individual identity throughout the seventeenth century. This shift from conceptions of a relational body that was open, heterogeneous and part of generative processes, to an individuated body with stable boundaries and fixed form, may, we suggest, be correlated with changing understandings of what it means to create: from a formulation in which to create is to be part of an ongoing process, to one that 'reads back' from the finished product to the capacity that produced it. And as this capacity became more closely associated, in the eighteenth century, with individual agency and built-in human faculties, a further differentiation took place: anything defined as truly creative had to be 'original' rather than 'derivative' or 'copied' (Pope 2005). To create, thenceforth, was to orchestrate discontinuity rather than to participate in a constantly emerging process.

## A Volume of Creativity

This book challenges the idea that the capacity for creative improvisation is exercised by individuals against the conventions of culture and society. Improvisation and creativity, we contend, are intrinsic to the very processes of social and cultural life. The chapters that follow highlight the creative dynamic of cultural processes: the extent to which cultural forms are produced and reproduced, rather than merely replicated and transmitted, through active and experimental engagement over time and in the generation of persons within their social and material environments. They describe the ways in which creative and improvisational action emerges in writing, drawing, pattern-making, dreaming, poetry, drama and dance, politics, photography, narrative, commercial industry, radio and the practice of anthropology. They report on studies carried out in countries and regions as diverse as Japan, Papua New Guinea, England, Southern India, Uganda, Algeria, Java and New Zealand. Departing from the conventional characterization of creativity as an ability of gifted persons, they show how creativity is not necessarily sought after or celebrated in contexts where continuities with established cultural forms and models are valued. Emphasizing the collaborative and political dimensions of creative performance, they demonstrate the ways in which the reproduction of existing forms leads in practice to variations in their situated enactments. And with an eye to how the meaning of creativity has itself changed throughout the history of ideas, they consider its applicability as a term of cross-cultural analysis, as well as the potential of a focus on creative improvisation to support or subvert existing paradigms both within and beyond the discipline of anthropology.

The issue of how form is generated from precedent is central to the chapters by Amar S. Mall and Fuyubi Nakamura, who explore the dynamics of making in the respective fields of pattern-drawing and calligraphic writing in order to trace the material engagements entailed in creative practice. Such exploration prompts questions about the relationships between repetition and deviation, and between replication and variation. That there is creativity in the following of tradition is a theme pursued in chapters throughout this volume, ranging from Felicia Hughes-Freeland's discussion of Javanese dance to Jeanette Edwards' demonstration of how Baptists explore innovative techniques of human conception through ancient texts. These chapters are concerned with nuances and complexities, questioning the black-and-white simplicity of such received oppositions as invention versus convention, and innovation versus tradition. In this they show how ethnographically informed anthropological research can make a quite distinctive contribution to the contemporary understanding of creative processes (see Glaskin 2005).

Creativity, with its improvisational dynamic, calls for analysis of the social relations and cultural formations that guide it and in terms of which it has effects. Accordingly, many chapters explore processes of creativity in relation to definitions of personhood, sources of agency, patterns of ownership and notions of authorship. As Karin Barber explains in the next chapter, creativity is shaped by models of social being. Given these entanglements, it is better approached as socially embedded and culturally diffuse than as a clearly defined act or bounded product. These qualities of creativity are described in subsequent chapters in terms of fluidity and flows. Rather than associating creativity with newness and the disjunctures this is often taken to imply, several authors stress continuity and connection as ways through which creativity emerges. Treating creativity as a social and cultural process, these authors bring into critical focus the limitations entailed in conceptualizing creativity as a form of invention exercised by the autonomous individual.

As a social process in which persons are engaged, creativity is at the same time configured, narrated and reflected upon in discourse. While emergent in ongoing social action, it is also often marked and framed. These reflexive dimensions, as Barber shows, can be integral to performances that bring their own processes of production into focus. Relations of power and authority are often important in determining what is considered to be creative and what is not. Judith Scheele's chapter draws attention to the workings of these relations alongside the characterization of tradition in local political discourses. James Leach's contribution also underlines the politics implicit in anthropological interpretations that deploy Western concepts of creativity in places where they do not necessarily belong. He warns that such deployment can amount to a kind of 'conceptual colonialism'. The cross-cultural dynamics entailed in the construal of creativity are central to the chapter by Elizabeth Cory-Pearce, in which she questions the stability of the categories 'self' and 'other', and asks where creativity is located in a world of historical interconnections and migrations. Such questions are pertinent, especially in the light of concerns with how innovation works in colonial and post-colonial contexts (see Küchler and Were 2003).

These contexts, of course, include those of anthropological research and teaching. If, as John Davis (1999) has asserted, anthropological description is itself a creative practice, then our investigations of creativity cannot be confined to the settings of fieldwork, as portrayed for example in the chapters by Richard Vokes and Clara Mafra, but must extend to the environments of the ethnographer's study, in which he or she sits down to write, not to mention the classroom or teaching workshop where professional anthropologists and students together wrestle with the problems of what anthropological knowledge is, how it is created and how it should be conveyed. Robey Callahan and Trevor Stack, in their chapter, describe how the struggling ethnographer attempts to reconcile the flux and immersion of the field experience with the isolation and critical distance required of the writer who is under pressure to produce new knowledge. Amanda Ravetz, for her part, analyses the tension between the pedagogical principles embedded in the training of students, respectively, in fine art and social anthropology, through the example of a workshop for students in visual anthropology. As both these chapters show, and as Harris points out in his Introduction to Part IV, there are good grounds for opening up the notion of the field to include the labours of both writing and teaching, and the settings in which they are conducted, since they are as much implicated in the creation of anthropological knowledge as is the labour of fieldwork, conventionally understood.

Apart from an opening chapter by Karin Barber and a closing epilogue by Clara Mafra, this book is divided into four parts. The first, corresponding to the generative aspect of improvisation, explores the creativities of life and art, and considers the issues involved in the attribution of creative agency, for example in the fields of the graphic and performing arts, and of intellectual property law. The second part, corresponding to the relational aspect of improvisation, shows how the sources of creativity are practically embedded in social, political and religious institutions, and in dispositions of power and authority. Part III is concerned with improvisation in its temporal aspect, focusing on the relation between creativity and the perception and passage of time in history, tradition and the life-course. The final part takes up the improvisational quality of the way we work, looking at the creativity of anthropological scholarship itself. How, if at all, does the generation of new knowledge in the dialogic contexts of encounters between ethnographers and their subjects, or between teachers of anthropology and their students, differ from the generativity of those interpersonal encounters in which all social and cultural life subsists? For some of the answers, and for many more questions, read on!

## Notes

1. We are grateful to Margherita Pieraccini for this observation.

## References

Allen, N. (1998), 'The category of substance: a Maussian theme revisited', in W. James and N.J. Allen (eds), Marcel Mauss: A Centenary Tribute, New York: Berghahn Books.

Aunger, R. (2000), Darwinizing Culture, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bakhtin, M. (1984 [1965]), Rabelais and His World (trans. Hélène Iswolsky), Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Bergson, H. (1911), Creative Evolution (trans. A. Mitchell), London: Macmillan.

Boden, M. (1990), The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Bourdieu, P. (1977), Outline of a Theory of Practice (trans. R. Nice), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brand, S. (1994), How Buildings Learn: What Happens to Them After They're Built, London: Penguin.

Bruner, E. (1993), 'Epilogue: Creative persona and the problem of authenticity', in S. Lavie, K. Narayan and R. Rosaldo (eds), Creativity/Anthropology, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Camille, M. (1992), Image on the Edge. The Margins of Medieval Art, London: Reaktion Books.

Certeau, M. de (1984), The Practice of Everyday Life (trans. S. Rendall), Berkeley: University of California Press.

Clark, A. (1997), Being There: Putting Brain, Body and the World Together Again, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Cook, N. (1990), Music, Imagination and Culture, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Daston, L. and Park, K. (2001), Wonders and the Order of Nature, 11501750, New York: Zone Books.

Davis, J. (1999), 'Administering creativity', Anthropology Today, 15(2): 49.

Friedman, J. (2001), 'The iron cage of creativity: an exploration', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press.

Gatewood, J. (1985), 'Actions speak louder than words', in J.W. Dougherty (ed), Directions in Cognitive Anthropology, Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Gell, A. (1999), Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Glaskin, K. (2005), 'Innovation and ancestral revelation: The case of dreams', Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 11: 297314.

Ingold, T. (1986), Evolution and Social Life, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

(2000), The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill, London: Routledge.

(2001), 'From the transmission of representations to the education of attention', in H. Whitehouse (ed), The Debated Mind: Evolutionary Psychology versus Ethnography, Oxford: Berg.

(2006a), 'Walking the plank: meditations on a process of skill', in J. Dakers (ed), Defining Technological Literacy: Towards an Epistemological Framework, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

(2006b), 'Rethinking the animate, re-animating thought', Ethnos, 71: 920.

Jackson, M. (1996), Things As They Are: New Directions in Phenomenological Anthropology, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

James, W. and Mills, D. (2005), 'Introduction: From representation to action in the flow of time', in W. James and D. Mills (eds), The Qualities of Time. Anthropological Approaches (ASA Monographs 41), Oxford: Berg.

Kemp, M. (1995), "Wrought by no artist's hand": The natural, the artificial, the exotic, and the scientific in some artefacts from the Renaissance', in C. Farago (ed), Reframing the Renaissance. Visual Culture in Europe and Latin America 14501650, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Kristeller, P.O. (1983), "Creativity" and "Tradition", Journal of the History Ideas, 44(1): 10513.

Kubler, G. (1962), The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Küchler, S. and Were, G. (2003), 'Clothing and innovation: A Pacific perspective', Anthropology Today, 19(2): 35.

Latour, B. (1993), We Have Never Been Modern, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Lee, J. and Ingold, T. (2006), 'Fieldwork on foot: perceiving, routing, socializing', in S. Coleman and P. Collins (eds), Locating the Field: Space, Place and Context in Anthropology (ASA Monographs 42), Oxford: Berg.

Lefebvre, H. (2004), Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life (trans. S. Elden and G. Moore), London: Continuum.

Liep, J. (2001), 'Introduction', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press.

Pope, R. (2005), Creativity. Theory, History and Practice, London: Routledge.

Pye, D. (1968), The Nature and Art of Workmanship, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rosaldo, R., Lavie, S. and Narayan, K. (1993), 'Introduction: Creativity in anthropology', in S.Lavie, K. Narayan and R. Rosaldo(eds), Creativity/Anthropology, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Sassoon, R. (2000), The Art and Science of Handwriting, Bristol: Intellect.

Schade-Poulsen, M. (2001), 'The "playing" of music in a state of crisis: Gender and Rai music in Algeria', in J. Liep (ed), Locating Cultural Creativity, London: Pluto Press.

Sigaut, F. (1994), 'Technology', in T. Ingold (ed), Companion Encyclopedia of Anthropology: Humanity, Culture and Social Life, London: Routledge.

Siza, A. (1997), Architecture Writings, ed. A. Angelillo, Milan: Skira Editore.

Sperber, D. (1996), Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell.

Stallybrass, P. and White, A. (1986), The Politics and Poetics of Transgression, London: Methuen.

Volkman, T.A. (1994), 'Our garden in the sea: contingency and improvisation in Mandar women's work', American Ethnologist, 21(3): 56485.

Wieman, H.N. (1961), Intellectual Foundations of Faith, London: Vision.
