> 来源：The English house
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The English house\The English house.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3. Dependencies

Farming - The stables and dependent rooms

## B. The surroundings of the house

## (Garden, drive, gate-lodge, boundaries, garden buildings, garden ornament)

Character and importance of the garden in England - Gardens old and new - The formal garden— Principles of the modern garden - The position of the house in the garden - The garden wall  The garden gate — The gate-lodge. Its history - The modern gate-lodge - The drive — The forecourt — History - Gardens. Elements of the old - Elements of the new garden - The terrace. Its significance — Raised walks - Layout and construction of the terrace - The flower-garden. (Ornamental garden) - Specialised flower-garden - The lawn - The bowling-green - Games pitches - Ponds and fountains  Arbours. Pergolas - Clipped hedges and trees —Bordered walks — The kitchen-garden - Greenhouses. The garden courtyard and buildings - The fruit-garden — Gazebos. Architectonic ornaments — Sun-dials — Statues and other decorations in lead - The dove-cote -Garden furniture

## C. The smaller country-house

Great boom in house-building- Rise of the middle-class country-house— The weekend house — Types of small country-house. Difference between them and the large ones - Characteristics of the small country-house — Garden and drive -Layout of the garden - Basic forms with four, three and two reception rooms — Aping the large house — Attempts towards a better form — The hall in the small house - The smallest country-house — First-floor rooms — The domestic quarters — The service courtyard - Greenhouse and garden

## D. The urban dwelling-house

Importance and character of the town house-Prejudice against houses with shops attached— Leasehold and street planning - Types

## I. The larger free-standing house

International character — Lowther Lodge by Norman Shaw - Lord Windsor's house by Wade - A house in Glasgow
