> 来源：The English house
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The English house\The English house.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 2. Damp. More ventilation required

Open fires are the only means of heating the house. The many advantages the fire-place is deemed to possess (not least its aesthetic advantages, some of which, it must be admitted, exist only in the imagination) so completely convince the Englishman of its superiority to all other forms of heating that he never even remotely considers replacing it with the more efficient and more economical stove. One presumes that the mild climate is also responsible for the fact that the English have made scarcely any use at all of central heating. And even when it is installed it never replaces the open fire, for to the English a room without a fire is like a body without a soul.

However, the fire-place in England serves another, extremely important, purpose. I refer to ventilation. Much ventilation is needed, largely because of the high humidity of the atmosphere. Humidity is the most marked of all England's climatic features: it accounts for the frequent fogs, for the distances in which all is veiled in a light mist, for the luxuriant green of the plant-life, which lasts the whole year round. As regards its effect on people, it is responsible for that permanently chilly feeling that so often causes visitors to catch cold. In enclosed spaces it induces the fusty, musty smell that affects any room that is not thoroughly aired every day. It necessitates extremely powerful ventilation, which, indeed, the fire-place admirably provides. At all events, its justification in England lies in its capacity to ventilate far more than to heat, as is demonstrated by the English belief that every bedroom must have its fire-place, even if the fire is rarely lit. The large diameter of the flues gives some idea of the great volume of air that the fire-plaçe when hot continuously extracts from the room; the old diameter was 23-35.5 cm. (1-12 bricks); nowadays, however, they are often as small as 23 cm. Every fireplace has a flue of its own, which accounts for the immense chimney-stacks on English houses.

The need for adequate ventilation also influences the construction of the house in many other ways. It accounts, for example, for the Englishman's fondness for sash-windows, for there is no window that can regulate the ventilation as minutely as the English sash-window. Both halves can be pushed up and down to let air in at the top or bottom; thanks to a counter-weight in the suspension the light sticks at any position to which it is pushed. Again, the possibility of creating a draught through the whole house is often considered at the planning stage; in the case of blocks of workmen's flats this idea becomes one of the most important points to be considered. The large amount of ventilation is the cause of the famous draughtiness of the English houses, which has already provoked many a harsh word from foreigners. But the blazing fire in the grate is solely responsible for continuously sucking a powerful current of air through cracks in doors and windows, towards the fire-place. The English are more or less impervious to the draught, partly because they are used to it, partly because they take the precaution of wearing warm underclothing. They have a highly-developed need of fresh air. They usually sleep with the window open, open the windows in unheated railway compartments in winter and, in general, have nowhere near the same need of warmth as we on the continent with our over-heated railways carriages and the tropical temperatures in our rooms.

## Questions concerning the subsoil

The battle against damp is expressed in other ways, most importantly in the choice of building sites. The first and most important point to be considered when assessing a site is whether the subsoil is clay or sand. Sandy soil is considered by far the better and the more worth looking for of the two.

Sandy soil allows rain-water to filter through immediately to a lower, impermeable stratum, whence it finds its way naturally to the water-courses and basins. This is why sandy paths dry quickly after rain. Clay, however, retains water on the surface, where it must evaporate. In this way it increases the humidity of the atmosphere even more by absorbing latent heat when the temperature of the air falls significantly, so that clay building land is always colder than sandy ground. Chalky soils are usually porous and behave in the same way as sand. In England recently so much attention has been paid to questions of the subsoil that it is now almost the first consideration for anyone choosing land for a house or buying a house, with the result that round London houses and rented property on sandy soil cost twice as much as those on clay. These popular assumptions are, of course, only partly true. Thus, for example, sandy soils are only dry when the impermeable lower stratum really does allow the water to drain away. There is little advantage if it holds the water, as it may do in a basin with a closer-grained subsoil. And again, in certain circumstances, for example when it slopes in the direction of a run-off, there is no danger in a clay subsoil. The English authorities have recently found it expedient to publish their views on the question of subsoils in building land and, in so far as London and its environs are concerned, to explain the situation in detail and in popular form, an enterprise which, in view of the traditional passivity of the English authorities, must be doubly commended.13
