> 来源：Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Reinventing the Door

On a freezing day in February, posted on the door of the Sociology Department at Walla Walla University, Washington, could be seen a small hand-written notice: "The door-closer is on strike, for God's sake, keep the door closed." This fusion of labor relations, religion, advertisement, semiotics, and technique in one single insignificant fact is exactly the sort of thing I want to help describe. As a technologist teaching in an engineering school in Colombus, Ohio, I want to challenge some of the assumptions sociologists often hold about the "social context" of machines.

Walls are a nice invention, but if there were no holes in them, there would be no way to get in or out; they would be mausoleums or tombs. The problem is that, if you make holes in the walls, anything and anyone can get in and out (bears, visitors, dust, rats, noise). So architects invented this hybrid: a hole-wall, often called a door, which, although common enough, has always struck me as a miracle of technology. The cleverness of the invention hinges upon the hinge-pin: instead of driving a hole through walls with a sledge hammer or a pick, you simply gently push the door (I am supposing here that the lock has not been invented; this would over-complicate the already highly complex story of this door). Furthermore, and here is the real trick, once you have passed through the door, you do not have to find trowel and cement to rebuild the wall you have just destroyed; you simply push the door gently back (I ignore for now the added complication of the "pull" and "push" signs).

So, to size up the work done by hinges, you simply have to imagine that every time you want to get in or out of the building you have to do the same work as a prisoner trying to escape or a gangster trying to rob a bank, plus the work of those who rebuild either the prison's or the bank's walls.

If you do not want to imagine people destroying walls and rebuilding them every time they wish to leave or enter a building, then imagine the work that would have to be done in order to keep inside or to keep outside all the things and people that, left to themselves, would go the wrong way. As Maxwell could have said, imagine his demon working without a door. Anything could escape from or penetrate into the department, and there would soon be complete equilibrium between the depressing and noisy surrounding area and the inside of the building. Techniques are always involved when asymmetry or irreversibility is the goal; it might appear that doors are a striking counter example since they maintain the hole-wall in a reversible state, but the allusion to Maxwell's demon clearly shows that such is not the case. The reversible door is the only way to irreversibly trap inside a differential accumulation of warm sociologists, knowledge, papers, and also, alas, paperwork; the hinged door allows a selection of what gets in and what gets out so as to locally increase order or information. If you let the drafts get inside, the drafts will never get outside to the publishers.

Now, draw two columns (if I am not allowed to give orders to the reader of Social Problems then take it as a piece of strongly worded advice). In the right column, list the work people would have to do if they had no door; in the left column write down the gentle pushing (or pulling) they have to do in order to fulfill the same tasks. Compare the two columns; the enormous effort on the right is balanced by the little one on the left, and this thanks to hinges. I will define this transformation of a major effort into a minor one by the word translation or delegation; I will say that we have delegated (or translated or displaced or shifted out) to the hinge the work of reversibly solving the hole-wall dilemma. Calling on a sociologist friend, I do not have to do this work nor even to think about it; it was delegated by the carpenter to a character, the hinge, that I will call a nonhuman (notice that I did not say "inhuman" ). I simply enter the department of sociology. As a more general descriptive rule, every time you want to know what a nonhuman does, simply imagine what other humans or other nonhumans would have to do were this character not present. This imaginary substitution exactly sizes up the role, or function, of this little figure.

Before going on, let me cash out one of the side benefits of this table: in effect, we have drawn a scale balance where tiny efforts balance out mighty weights. The scale we drew (at least the one that you drew if you have obeyed my orders—I mean, followed my advice) reproduces the very leverage allowed by hinges. That the small be made stronger than the large is a very moral story indeed (think of David and Goliath). By the same token, this is also, since at least Archimedes' days, a very good definition of a lever and of power: the minimum you need to hold and deploy astutely in order to produce the maximum effect. Am I alluding to machines or to Syracuse's King? I don't know, and it does not matter since the King and Archimedes fused the two "minimaxes" into one single story told by Plutarch: the defense of Syracuse. I contend that this reversal of forces is what sociologists should look at in order to understand the "social construction" of techniques and not at a hypothetical social context they are not equipped to grasp. This little point having been made, let me go on with the story (we will understand later why I do not really need your permission to go on and why, nevertheless, you are free not to go on, although only relatively so).
