> 来源：Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Delegating to Humans

There is a problem with doors. Visitors push them to get in or pull on them to get out (or vice versa), but then the door remains open. That is, instead of the door you have a gaping hole in the wall through which, for instance, cold rushes in and heat rushes out. Of course, you could imagine that people living in the building or visiting the department of sociology would be a well disciplined lot (after all, sociologists are meticulous people). They will learn to close the door behind them and retransform the momentary hole into a well-sealed wall. The problem is that discipline is not the main characteristic of people. Are they going to be so well-behaved? Closing a door would appear to be a simple enough piece of know-how once hinges have been invented; but, considering the amount of work, innovations, sign-posts, recriminations that go on endlessly everywhere to keep them closed (at least in Northern regions), it seems to be rather poorly disseminated.

This is where the age-old choice, so well analyzed by Mumford (1966), is offered to you: either to discipline the people or to substitute for the unreliable people another delegated human character whose only function is to open and close the door. This is called a groom or a porter (from the French word for door) or a gatekeeper, or a janitor, or a concierge, or a turnkey, or a gaoler. The advantage is that you now have to discipline only one human and may safely leave the others to their erratic behavior. No matter who these others are and where they come from, the groom will always take care of the door. A nonhuman (the hinges) plus a human (the groom) have solved the hole-wall dilemma.

Solved? Not quite. First of all, if the department pays for a porter, they will have no money left to buy coffee or books or to invite eminent foreigners to give lectures. If they give the poor little boy other duties besides that of porter, then he will not be present most of the time, and the damned door will stay open. Even if they had money to keep him there, we are now faced with a problem that two hundred years of capitalism has not completely solved: how to discipline a youngster to reliably fulfill a boring and underpaid duty. Although there is now only one human to be disciplined instead of hundreds (in practice only dozens because Walla Walla is rather difficult to locate), the weak point of the tactic is now revealed: if this one lad is unreliable then the whole chain breaks down. If he falls asleep on the job or goes walkabout, there will be no appeal; the damned door willstay open (remember that locking it is no solution since this would turn it into a wall, and then providing every visitor with the right key is an impossible task). Of course, the little rat may be punished or even flogged. But imagine the headlines: "Sociologists of science flog porter from poor working class background." And what if he is black, which might very well be the case, given the low pay? No, disciplining a groom is an enormous and costly task that only Hilton Hotels can tackle, and that for other reasons that have nothing to do with keeping the door properly closed.

If we compare the work of disciplining the groom with the work he substitutes for, according to the list defined above, we see that this delegated character has the opposite effect to that of the hinge. A simple task, forcing people to close the door, is now performed at an incredible cost; the minimum effect is obtained with maximum spending and spanking. We also notice, when drawing the two lists, an interesting difference. In the first relationship (hinges vis-à-vis work of many people), you not only had a reversal of forces (the lever allows gentle manipulations to heavy weights) but also a reversal of time. Once the hinges are in place, nothing more has to be done apart from maintenance (oiling them from time to time). In the second set of relations (groom's work versus many people's work), not only do you fail to reverse the forces, but you also fail to modify the time schedule. Nothing can be done to prevent the groom who has been reliable for two months from failing on the sixty-second day; at this point it is not maintenance work that has to be done, but the same work as on the first day—apart from the few habits that you might have been able to incorporate into his body. Although they appear to be two similar delegations, the first one is concentrated in time, whereas the other is continuous; more exactly, the first one creates a clear-cut distinction between production and maintenance, whereas in the other the distinction between training and keeping in operation is either fuzzy or nil. The first one evokes the past perfect ("once hinges had been installed"); the second the present tense ("when the groom is at his post"). There is a built-in inertia in the first that is largely lacking in the second. A profound temporal shift takes place when nonhumans are appealed to: time is folded.
