> 来源：Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Appealing to Gods

Here comes the most interesting and saddest lesson of the note posted on the door: people are not circumspect, disciplined, and watchful, especially not Walla Walla drivers after the happy-hour on Friday night. Well, that's exactly the point that the note made: "The groom is on strike, for God's sake, keep the door closed." In our societies, they are two systems of appeal: nonhuman and super-human, that is machines and gods. This note indicates how desperate its frozen and anonymous authors were (I have never been able to trace them back and to honor them as they deserved). They first relied on the inner morality and common sense of humans. This failed; the door was always left open. Then they appealed to what we technologists consider the supreme court of appeal, that is, to a nonhuman who regularly and conveniently does the job in place of unfaithful humans. To our shame, we must confess that it also failed after a while. The door was again always left open. How poignant their line of thought is! They moved up and backward to the oldest and firmest court of appeal there is, there was, and ever will be. If human and nonhuman have failed, certainly God will not deceive them.

I am ashamed to say that, when I crossed the hallway this fatal February day, the door was open. Do not accuse God, though, because the note did not appeal directly to Him (I know I should have added "Her" for affirmative action reasons, but I wonder how theologians would react). God is not accessible without mediators. The anonymous authors knew their catechisms well, so instead of asking for a direct miracle (God Him/Herself holding the door firmly closed or doing so through the mediation of an angel, as has happened in several occasions, for instance when Paul was delivered from his prison), they appeal to the respect for God in human hearts. This was their mistake. In our secular times, this is no longer enough.

Nowadays nothing seems to do the job of disciplining men and women and forcing them simply to close doors in cold weather. It is a similar despair that pushed the road engineer to add a Golem to the red flag to force drivers to beware—although the only way to slow drivers is still a good traffic-jam. You seem to always need more and more of these figurated delegates aligned in rows. It is the same with delegates as with drugs; you start with soft ones and end by shooting up. There is an inflation for delegated characters too. After a while they weaken. In the old days it might have been enough just to have a door for people to know how to close it. But then, the embodied skills somehow disappeared; people had to be reminded of their training. Stil, the simple inscription "keep the door closed" might have been sufficient in the good old days. But you know people; they no longer pay attention to such notices and need to be reminded by stronger devices. It is then that you install automatic grooms, since electric shocks are not as acceptable for men as for cows. In the old times, when quality was still good, it might have been enough just to oil it from time to time, but nowadays even automatisms go on strike.

It is not, however, that the movement is always from softer to harder devices, that is, from an autonomous body of knowledge to force through the intermediary situation of worded injunctions, as the Walla Walla door would suggest. It also goes the other way. Although the deskilling thesis appears to be the general case (always go from intra-somatic to extra-somatic skills; never rely on undisciplined men, but always on safe delegated nonhumans), this is far from true. For instance, red lights are usually respected, at least when they are sophisticated enough to integrate traffic flows through sensors. The delegated policemen standing there day and night is respected even though it has no whistles, gloved hands, and body to enforce this respect. Imagined collisions with the other cars or with the absent policemen are enough to keep drivers and cars in check. The thought experiment "what would happen if the delegated character was not there," is the same as the one I recommended above to size up its function. The same incorporation from written injunction to body skills is at work with car user manuals. No one, I guess, will cast more than a cursory glance at the manual before igniting the engine. There is a large body of skills that we have now so well embodied or incorporated that the mediations of the written instructions are useless. From extra-somatic they have become intra-somatic. Incorporation in human or in nonhuman bodies is also left to the authors/engineers.
