> 来源：Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson)\Special Issue The Sociology of Science and Technology Mixing Humans and Nonhumans Together The Sociology of a Door-Closer (Jim Johnson).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Offering a Coherent Vocabulary

It is because humans, nonhumans, and even angels are never sufficient in themselves and because there is no one direction going from one type of delegation to the other, that it is so useless to impose a priori divisions between which skills are human and which ones are not human, which characters are personified and which remain abstract, which delegation is forbidden and which is permissible, which type of delegation is stronger or more durable than the other. In place of these many cumbersome distinctions why not take up a few simple descriptive tools?

Following Madeleine Akrich's lead, we will speak only in terms of scripts or scenes or scenarios played by human or nonhuman actors, which may be either figurative or nonfigurative. Humans are not necessarily figurative; for instance you are not allowed to take the highway policeman as an individual chum. He/she is the representative of authority, and if he/she is really dumb, he/she will reject any individualizing efforts from you, like smiles, jokes, bribes, or fits of anger. He/she will fully play the administrative machinery.

Following Akrich, I will call the retrieval of the script from the situation description. These descriptions are always in words and appear very much like semiotic commentaries on a text or like a programming language. They define actors, endow them with competences and make them do things, and evaluate the sanction of these actions very much like the narrative program of semioticians.

Although most of the scripts are in practice silent either because they are intra- or extrasomatic, the written descriptions are not an artifact of the analyst (technologist, sociologist, or semiotician) because there exist many states of affairs in which they are explicitly uttered. The gradient going from intra-somatic to extra-somatic skills through discourse is never fully stabilized and allows many entries revealing the process of translation. I have already listed several entries: user manuals, instruction, demonstration or drilling situations (in this case a human or a speech-synthesizer speaks out the user manual), practical thought experiments ("what would happen if instead of the red light a policemen were there"). To this should be added the innovator's workshop where most of the objects to be devised are still at the stage of projects committed to paper ("if we had a device doing this and that, we could then do this and that"); market analysis in which consumers are confronted with the new device; and, naturally, the training situation studied by anthropologists where people faced with a foreign device talk to themselves while trying out various combinations ("what will happen if I attach this lead here to the mains?"). The analyst has to capture these situations in order to write down the scripts. The analyst makes a thought experiment by comparing presence/absence tables and collating all the actions done by actants: if I take this one away, this and that other action will be modified.

I will call the translation of any script from one repertoire to a more durable one transcription or inscription or encoding. Translation does not have here only its linguistic meaning but also the religious one, "translation of the remains of St Christel," and the artistic one, "translating the feelings of Calder into bronze." This definition does not imply that the direction always goes from soft bodies to hard machines, but simply that it goes from a provisional less reliable one to a longer-lasting, more faithful one. For instance, the embodiment in cultural tradition of the user manual of a car is a transcription, but so is the replacement of a policeman by a traffic-light. One goes from machines to bodies, whereas the other goes the other way. Specialists of robotics have very much abandoned the pipe dream of total automation; they learned the hard way that many skills are better delegated to humans than to nonhumans, whereas others may be moved away from incompetent humans.

I will call prescription whatever a scene presupposes from its transcribed actors and authors (this is very much like "role expectation" in sociology, except that it may be inscribed or encoded in the machine). For instance, a Renaissance Italian painting is designed to be viewed from a specific angle of view prescribed by the vanishing lines, exactly like a traffic light expects that its users will watch it from the street and not sideways. In the same way as they presuppose a user, traffic lights presuppose that there is someone who has regulated the lights so that they have a regular rhythm. When the mechanism is stuck it is very amusing to see how long it takes drivers before deciding that the traffic light is no longer mastered by a reliable author. "User input" in programming language is another very telling example of this inscription in the automatism of a living character whose behavior is both free and predetermined.

This inscription of author and users in the scene is very much the same as that of a text. I already showed how the author of this article was ascribed (wrongly) to be a technologist in

Ohio. It is the same for the reader. I have many times used "you" and even "you sociologists." If you remember well, I even ordered you to draw up a table (or advised you to do so). I also asked your permission to go on with the story. In doing so, I built up an inscribed reader to whom I prescribed qualities and behavior as surely as the traffic light or the painting prepared a position for those looking at them. Did you subscribe to this definition of yourself? Or worse, is there any one at all to read this text and occupy the position prepared for the reader? This question is a source of constant difficulties for those who do not grasp the basics of semiotics. Nothing in a given scene can prevent the inscribed user or reader from behaving differently from what was expected (nothing, that is, until the next paragraph). The reader-in-theflesh may totally ignore my definition of him or her. The user of the traffic light may well cross on the red. Even visitors to the department of sociology may never show up because Walla Walla is too far away, in spite of the fact that their behavior and trajectory have been perfectly anticipated by the groom. As for the computer user input, the cursor might flash for ever without the user being there or knowing what to do. There might be an enormous gap between the prescribed user and the user-in-the-flesh, a difference as big as the one between the "I" of a novel and the novelist. It is exactly this difference that so much upset the authors of the anonymous appeal posted on the door. It is because they could not discipline people with words, notes, and grooms, that they had to appeal to God. On another occasion, however, the gap between the two may be nil: the prescribed user is so well anticipated, so carefully nested inside the scenes, so exactly dovetailed, that it does what is expected. To stay within the same etymological root, I would be tempted to call the way actors (human or nonhuman) tend to extirpate themselves from the prescribed behavior des-inscription and the way they accept or happily acquiesce to their lot subscription.

The problem with scenes is that they are usually well prepared for anticipating users or readers who are at close quarter. For instance, the groom is quite good in its anticipation that people will push the door open and give it the energy to reclose it. It is very bad at doing anything to help people arrive there. After fifty centimeters, it is helpless and cannot act, for example, to bring people to Washington state. Still, no scene is prepared without a preconceived idea of what sort of actors will come to occupy the prescribed positions. This is why I said that, although you were free not to go on with this paper, you were only "relatively" so. Why? Because I know you are hard-working, serious American sociologists, reading a serious issue of Social Problems on sociology of science and technology. So, I can safely bet that I have a good chance of having you read the paper thoroughly! So my injunction "read the paper up to the end, you sociologist" is not very risky. I will call pre-inscription all the work that has to be done upstream of the scene and all the things assimilated by an actor (human or nonhuman) before coming to the scene as a user or as an author. For instance, how to drive a car is basically pre-inscribed in any (western) youth years before he or she comes to passing the driving licence test; hydraulic pistons were also pre-inscribed for slowly giving back the energy gathered years before innovators brought them to bear on automated grooms. Engineers can bet on this pre-determination when they draw up their prescriptions. This is what Gerson and his colleagues call "articulation work" (Fujimura, 1987). A lovely example of efforts at pre-inscription is provided by Orson Welles in Citizen Kane , where the hero not only bought a theater for his singing wife to be applauded in, but also bought the journals that were to do the reviews, bought off the art critics themselves, and paid the audience to show up—all to no avail, since the wife eventually quit. Humans and nonhumans are very, very undisciplined no matter what you do and how many predeterminations you are able to control upstream of the action.

Drawing a side-conclusion in passing, we can call sociologism the claim that, given the competence and pre-inscription of human users and authors, you can read out the scripts nonhuman actors have to play; and technologism the symmetric claim that, given the competence and pre-inscription of the nonhuman actors, you can easily read out and deduce the behavior prescribed to authors and users. From now on, these two absurdities will, I hope, disappear from the scene, since the actors at any point may be human or nonhuman and since the displacement (or translation, or transcription) makes the easy reading-out of one repertoire into the next impossible. The bizarre idea that society might be made up of human relations is a mirror image of the other no less bizarre idea that techniques might be made up of nonhuman relations. We deal with characters, delegates, representatives, or, more nicely, lieutenants (from the French "lieu" "tenant," i.e., holding the place of, for, someone else); some figurative, others nonfigurative; some human, others nonhuman; some competent, others incompetent. You want to cut through this rich diversity of delegates and artificially create two heaps of refuse: "society" on one side and "technology" on the other? That's your privilege, but I have a less messy task in mind.

A scene, a text, an automatism can do a lot of things to their prescribed users at close range, but most of the effect finally ascribed to them depends on a range of other set-ups being aligned. For instance, the groom closes the door only if there are people reaching the Sociology Department of Walla Walla. These people arrive in front of the door only if they have found maps and only if there are roads leading to it; and, of course, people will start bothering about reading the maps, getting to Washington state and pushing the door open only if they are convinced that the department is worth visiting. I will call this gradient of aligned set-ups that endow actors with the pre-inscribed competences to find its users a chreod (a "necessary path" in the biologist Waddington's Greek): people effortlessly flow through the door, and the groom, hundreds of times a day, recloses the door—when it is not stuck. The result of such an alignment of set-ups is to decrease the number of occasions in which words are used; most of the actions become silent, familiar, incorporated (in human or in nonhuman bodies)—making the analyst's job so much harder. Even the classic debates about freedom, determination, predetermination, brute force, or efficient will— debates which are the twentieth century version of seventeenth century discussions on grace—will be slowly eroded away. (Since you have reached this point, it means I was right in saying earlier that you were not at all free to stop reading the paper. Positioning myself cleverly along a chreod, and adding a few other tricks of my own, I led you here . . . or did I? Maybe you skipped most of it; maybe you did not understand a word of it, oh you undisciplined American sociologist readers!)

There is one loose end in my story: why did the little (automatic) rat go on strike? The answer to this is the same as for the question earlier of why few people show up in Walla Walla. It is not because a piece of behavior is prescribed by an inscription that the predetermined characters will show up on time and do the job expected of them. This is true of humans, but it is truer of nonhumans. In this case the hydraulic piston did its job, but not the spring that collaborated with it. Any of the words above may be used to describe a set-up at any level and not only at the simple one I chose for the sake of clarity. It does not have to be limited to the case where a human deals with a series of nonhuman delegates; it can also be true of relations among nonhumans. In other words, when we get into a more complicated lash-up than the groom, we do not have to stop doing sociology; we go on studying "role expectation," behavior, social relations. The non-figurative character of the actors should not intimidate us.
