> 来源：Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3. The Habitus and the Space of Life-Styles

1. It follows from this that the relationship between conditions of existence and pracrices or the meaning of practices is not to be understood in terms either of the logic of mechanism or of the logic of consciousness.

2. J. Rivière in M. Proust and J. Rivière, Corespondance, 1914-1922 (Paris, Gallimard, 1976), p. 326.

In contrast  he atomisic prac  sl psycoloy, whic break they of practice to establish partial 'laws' claiming to account for the products of practice, the opus operatum, the aim is to establish general laws reproducing the laws of production, the modus operandi.

4. Economic theory, which treats economic agents as interchangeable actors, paradoxically fails to take account of the economic dispositions, and is thereby prevented from really explaining the systems of preferences which define incommensurable and independent subjective use-values.

5. An ethic, which seeks to impose the principles of an ethos (i.e., the forced choices of a social condition) as a universal norm, is another, more subtle way of succumbing to amor fati, of being content with what one is and has. Such is the basis of the felr contradiction berween ethics and revolutionary intent.

6. 'Bourgeois' is used here as shorthand for 'dominant fractions of the dominant class', and 'intellectual' or 'arrist' functions in the same way for 'dominated fractions of the dominant class'.

Nieze, Der Wille  Macht(Stutgart, Alfrd Kröer, 6), .3 . 630.

8. Bananas are the only fruit for which manual workers and farm workers have higher annual per capica spending (FF 23.26 and FF 25.20) chan all other classes, especially the senior execurives, who spend most on apples (FF 31.60 as against FF 21.00 for manual workers), whereas the rich, expensive fruits—-grapes, peaches and nuts—-are mainly eaten by professionals and industrial and commercial employers (FF 29.04 for grapes, 19.09 for peaches and 17.33 for nurs, as against FF 6.74, 11.78 and 4.90 respectively, for manual workers).

9. This whole paragraph is based on secondary analysis of the tables from the 1972 INSEE survey on household expenditure on 39 items by socio-occupational category.

plus nourrisantes et les plus économiques" the double aurology howing the - duction to pure economic function).' (Translator's nore.)

1In the French: 'e gros et le gras, gros rouge, gros sabors, gros travaux, gros e, grosses blagues, gros bon sens plaisanteries rasses'cheap red wine,clogs , obviousness), heavy work, belly laughs, crude common sense, crude jokes (translator).

12. The expression 'tastes of luxury' will be used rather than 'tastes of freedom'so that it is not forgotten that the tastes of freedom are also the product of a social nssity defined by he acilies,e, the distance from necessiy, which itoffrs.

13. N. Tabard, Besoins et aspirations des familles et des jeunes (Paris, CREDOC and CNAF, n.d.), p. 153.

14. J. W. Thibaur and A. W. Riecken, 'Some Determinants and Consequences of che Perception of Social Psychology', Joumal of Personality, 24 (1956), 113-133.

a C

16. One fine example, taken from Böhm-Bawerk, will demonstrate this essentialism: 'We must now consider a second phenomenon of human experience---one that is heavily fraught with consequence. Thar is che fact that we feel less concerned about fucure sensations of joy and sorrow simply because they do lie in the future, and the lessening of our concern is in proportion to the remoteness of thar future. Consequently we accord to goods which are intended to serve future ends a value which falls shorr of the true intensity of their future marginal utility. We systematically undervalue our future wants and also the means which serve to satisfy them.' E. Böhm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest, II (South Holland, I., 1959), 268, quoted by G. L. Stigler and G. S. Becker, 'De gustibus non est disputandum', American Economic Review, 67 ( March 1977), 76-90.

17.We may assume that the deep-seated relation to the future (and also to one's own person—which is valued more at higher levels of the social hierarchy) is reflected in the small proportion of manual workers who say that 'there is a new life after death' (15 percent, compared with 18 percent of crafrsmen and shopkeepers, office workers and middle managers, and 32 percent of senior executives).

It is not superfluous to point out that this art, which has its recognized viruoso, the 'life and soul of the party', can sink into the caricature of jokes or remarks that ar defined as seroypestupid or coarse in terms of the critera o popular as.

1The oppositions are much less clear-cut in the middle classes, although homologous differences are found berween primary teachers and office workers on the one hand and shopkeepers on the oher.

L

The preference for foreign restaurants—Iralian, Chinese, Japanese and, to a lesser Rus—  y x Spanish restaurants, which are associated with a more popular form of tourism, and North African restaurants, which are mosr favoured by junior executives (C.S. XXXIV).

u cer'). Sce also note 20 above (translator).

T     o e  u  ty.

24. In 'The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges', Social Science Information, 26 (December 1977), 645-668, Bourdieu develops the opposicion berween (wo ways of speaking, rooted in cwo relations to the body and the world, which have a lexical reflecion in the many idioms based on two words for 'mouth': la bouche and la gueule. La bouche is the 'standard' word for the mouth; bur in opposition to la gueule—a slang or 'vulgar' word except when applied to animals—-it tends to be restricted to the lips, whereas la gueule can include the whole face or the throar. Most of the idioms using la bouche imply fastidiousness, effeminacy or disdain; those with la gueule connote vigour, strength or violence (translator's note).

25. This means that the taxonomies applied to the perceived body (fat/thin, strong/weak, big/small ecare, as always, at oncearbirary(..,the ideal female boymay befaor thin, in different enomi nd social cntand eesay, i.e., grounded in the specific reason of a given social order.

26. More than ever, the French possessive pronouns—-which do not mark the owner's gender-—ought to be translated 'his or her'. The 'sexism' of the text results from the male translator's reluctance to defy the dominant use of a sexist symbolic system (cranslator).

27. Oddly bur accurately over-determined in English by droll/drawl (translator).

28. One could similarly contrast the bowl, which is generously illed and held cwohanded for unpretentious drinking, and the cup, into which a lictle is poured, and more later ('Would you care for a little more coffee?"), and which is held berween two fingers and sipped from.

29. Formality is a way of denying the truth of the social world and of social relations. Just as popular 'functionalism' is refused as regards food, so too there is a refusal of the realistic vision which leads the working classes to accept social exchanges for what they are (and, for example, to say, without cynicism, of someone who has done a favour or rendered a service, 'She knows I'll pay her back'). Suppressing avowal of the calculation which pervades social relations, there is a striving to see presents, received or given, as 'pure'restimonies of friendship, respect, affection, and equally 'pure' manifestations of generosity and moral worth.

3Throughout this analysis, it is the whole set of convergent tendencies that should be considered, rather rhan the scale of the differences, which are in any case minimized by the fact that the dominant class is divided into fractions whose tastes, especially in food, vary in opposice directions.

Fish is an exception: it is eaten more at higher social levels, the difference between the classes being particularly marked in the case of sole and salmon, which are associated wich luxury, and relatively small in the case of hake and fresh-water fish.

32. This is true for men, but for women the opposition takes a quite different form, because the division of labour berween the sexes takes very different forms in the dominated fractions (where it is minimized) and in the dominant fractions (where women's exclusion from economic responsibilities tends to align them with 'young' and 'artistic' roles: bourgeois or artistocratic women-and their salons —have tradicionally been mediators berween the world of art and the world of business).

33. Cf. J.-P. Sartre, Being and Nothingnesr (London, Methuen, 1969), pp. 339-351.

WD.Dannemaier nd F.J. Thum, Authoriy Status as a Factor n Percal Distortion of Size', Joumnal of Social Psychology, 63 (1964), 361-365.

Sc J.Dence, 'qsicia  760 Actes, 6 (December 1976), 2247.

i hope of a miraculous escape from their class-—correspond to the demands of ratio. nalized training and playing.

Sec Coln  PINE .  Juy 0.

38. Here too there is a hierarchy of legitimacies which defines the value assigned to the different sports in bourgeois conversation. Le Monde illustrates this fairly clearly by devoting serious 'critical' articles, ofren by well-known writers, to tennis and rugby (and secondarily athletics), whereas football and cycling get much more distant and impersonal treatment.

39. M. Proust, The Captive, pt. II, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff (London, Chatto and Windus, 1941), p. 236. Jean Renoir's film La Grande Illusion (1937) depicts the chivalrous code of French and German pilots in the First World War. British readers will remember the motto of the R.A.F., per ardua ad astra, 'through diffculties--and the heights-—to the stars', which similarly links heroic distinction with height (translator).

4Another distinctive feature, which sums up the opposition betwcen two relations to the body and to social interactions: two-thirds (59.8 percent) of the teachers say they never dance, whereas dancing is very common in the professions (only 18 percent, the lowest proportion in the whole population, say they never dance) (C.S. IV).

More than half the members of the Saint-Nom-la-Bretèche golf club are bankers, industrialists, commercial entrepreneurs or company directors, 26 percent are managing directors, executives or engineers and 16 percent are members of the prof essions.

Equally relevant would be the analysis of the relations betwcen the literary field, as the field of production of a universe of linguistic possibilities, and class habitus— see P. Bourdieu and L. Boltanski, 'Le fétichisme de la langue', Actes, 4 (July 1975), 2-32, and Bourdieu, 'Economics of Linguistic Exchanges'—or the relations, examined in chapter 8, between the space of the newspapers or the space of the political parties and the expectations of the different social classes.
