> 来源：Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 6. Cultural Goodwill

1The opinions expressed on music only have to be compared with the knowledge of works for it to be seen that a high proportion (two-thirds) of those who choose the most 'distinguished' answer ("All music of quality interests me') have little knowledge of classical music.

D. Barnes, Nightwood, 2nd ed. (London, Faber, 1950), pp. 2124.

Frank Their Bon LonnndianUniver , 1963), p. 6.

4Like the very content of these products (with, for example, their conspicuous ref. erences to legitimate works), the advertising for middle-brow cultural goods is a permanent encouragement to cultural allodoxia. It emphasizes both the economic and cultural accessibilityof the products offered and also their high legitimacy, by invoking cultural authorities (e.g., Academicians or prize juries) whose authority is iean allodoxi effet, sc te eniin i is iven tends to vary in nve ratio to competence.

5. Similar defence mechanisms in which the consumers make themselves the accomplices of the vendors are also found in other areas. Thus a marker rescarch specialist suggests that one of the most important functions of advercising may be to proide purchasers with arguments to reassure themselves after the purchase; J. F. Engel, 'The Influence of Needs and Attitudes on the Perception of Persuasion' in S. A. Greyser, ed., Toward Scientifc Marketing (Chicago, American Marketing Association, 1964), pp. 18-29. These ideological mechanisms of reassurance explain the disparity berween the agents' own evaluation of their cultural practices and the objective truth of these practices. Everything takes place as if, at all levels of the hierarchy of degrees of consecration, agents were always inclined to attribute m  a than  ev them.

6.Thus there is no need to invoke censorship or 'political complicity' (although this is not unknown) to explain why the most typically academic products, and also the most typically middle-brow products, have derived considerable reinforcement f tein. ric e  lciy py television and the corresponding changes in publishing and marketing strategies, this tends to modify the relations between the feld of restricted production and the field of large-scale production.

Felix in Barnes's Nightiwood (p. 24) shares this taste for oddities: 'Conversant with edicts and laws, folk story and heresy, taster of rare wines, thumber of rarer books and old wives' tales-—tales of men who became holy and of beasts that became damned--read in all plans for fortifications and bridges, given pause by all graveyards on all roads, a pedant of many churches and castles, his mind dimly and reverently reverberated to Madame de Sévigné, Goethe, Loyola and Brantôme.'

8. It is no accident that surveys on cultural practices and opinions tend to take the form of an examination in which the respondents, who are and always fee measured against a norm, obtain results that are ranked in accordance with their degree of scholastic consecration and express preferences which always correspond fairly closely to their educational qualifications, both in their content and in their modality.

9. The image which the formally educated have of the self-educated is a fine example o partal, -ntru pou be paral uciiyo perception and of the (unconscious) strategies through which each art of living is reinforced in its conviction of it own excellence by comparing itself fatteringly with other arts of living.

1.Need it be said that these two celebrated examples are chosen so as to invite the reader to reason a fortiori?

11. Ferdinand Cheval (1836-1924), a rural postman, built his 'Ideal Palace' singlehanded, from 1879 to 1912, with stones which he collected on his round and carried back to his home at Hauterives (Drôme). This extraordinary 'monument' (classified as such by Malraux when Minister of Culture) includes all the features mentioned in the text, and more. La Veillée des Chaumières was a magazine which brought serialized historical romances (accompanied by engravings) to a mainly peasant readership. (Translator's note.)

Though the Wei Bodhisattvas and those of Nara, Khmer and Javanese sculpture and Sung painting do not express the same communion with the cosmos as does a Romanesque tympanum, a Dance of Siva or the horsemen of the Parthenon, all alike express a communion of one kind or another, as does even Rubens in The Kermesse. We need but glance at any Greek masterpiece to see at once that its triumph over the mystery-laden East does not stem from any process of the reasoning mind, but from "the innumerable laughter of the waves". Like a mured orchestra the surge and thunder, already so remote, of ancient tragedy accompanies but does not drown Antigone's immortal cry.' A. Malraux, The Voices of Silence, trans. S. Gilbert (London, Secker and Warburg, 1954), pp. 635-636.

1. They are by Ferdinand Cheval, among the inscriptions on his Ideal Palace (translator).

1.See P. Bénichou, Le sacre de Pécrivain (Paris, José Corti, 1973), pp. 177-178.

15. Harpagon: Molière's Miser; Arnolphe: the protagonist of his Ecole des femmes, obsessed by marital infidelity (translator).

1.Attributed to the politician Edouard Herriot (translator)

17. What is said here about the middle positions (because it is most obvious in this case) is, of course, equally true of all positions in social space-time.

1C. Baudelor, R.Establet and J.Malemort, La petite bourgeoisie en Francei, Maspero, 1974), p. 153.

19. Among the properties of the strongly predetermined positions in the civil service (such as those of the junior administrative executives) the most significant from the point of view considered here is undoubtedly the fact that they offer, through their guaranteed career-structures, the assurance of a relatively predictable individual trajectory.

20. The placement of these positions is understandable since their emergence is to a large extent due to changes in the educational system.

The example of the craftsmen provides a good opportunity to re-emphasize that, in treating as a point what is in fact a space (and sometimes a genuine field), one inevitably simplifes. This simplification is entailed by the endeavour to grasp the social space as a whole (and so to avoid the errors almost inevitably incurred, as a direct consequence of autonomization, by monographs devoted to a particular 'occupation').

22. Some 19.5 percent of all the 'junior executives' (administrative executives, technicians, primary teachers) and 20.3 percent of the office workers are enrolled in a library (as against 3.7 percenr of the commercial employees and 2.2 percent of the small employers); 18.5 percent and 12.9 percent respectively collect stamps (as against 3.7 percent and 2.8 percent); 14.2 percent and 10.3 percent follow correspondence courses or evening classes (as against 0 percent and 2 percent) (C.S. IV).

.The notion of 'preference' in legitimate culture is only appropriate at and above a certain level of competence (corresponding approximately to a certificate of secondary education). This is seen clearly in the fact that, below this level, the respondents treat questions of preference as questions of knowledge, saying they prefer the painters they know, and that the proportion of respondents who know more or as many composers as the number of works they say they know rises wich level of education, while the most cultivated respondents refuse to acknowledge value in some of the works they know.

24. The office workers, especially the youngest ones, who have seen a high proportion of the films mentioned (3.5 on average, compared with 2.4 for the skilled manual workers and foremen, 2.3 for the craftsmen and small shopkeepers), are more interested in actors than directors (on average they name 2.8 actors and only 1 director, and often name the actors in films they have not seen). So if they had seen Visconti's Rocco and His Brothers more than any other category, it was probably because of the stars, Annie Girardot and Alain Delon.

The distictiveeature o the consellation of choics of the ecnicins who, s a whole, occupy the positions closest to the centre of gravity) lies in the fact that te re may mo cni  tnl books d mo tography and home movies.

2This law plays an important role in determining the choice of an artistic career rather than a less risky career (or vice versa) and, among the artistic careers, the choice of those which, at the moment in question, are the most risky (genre, manner etc.).

27. Another indication of the ambiguous position of the socio-medical services may be seen in the fact they are much more familiar with the smart sports than the o members o temiddle classs r example nly . percent  the y they have never played tennis, as against 70.4 percent of the primary teachers; for skiing, the corresponding figures are 41.6 percent and 78.5 percent).

28. The commercial junior executives and the secretaries, who have slightly less cultural capital than the members of the socio-medical services, make more disparate choices. They are interested in the films favoured by the working classes or the small employers ( The Longest Day, The Magnificent Seven, Vice and Virtue ). more than the teachers and the socio-medical services, while also being interested in the favourite films of the latter (Salvatore Giuliano, The Trial, Les dimanches de Ville d'Avray).

2. This pursuit of conformity to the ideal of distinction is revealed in the combined choice of 'pot-luck' meals and 'original and exotic' meals--'little Chinese restaurants'-—or in series such as Françoise Hardy, Burfet, Van Gogh, which may be combined with the teachers' Kandinsky or the professionals' Concerto for the Lef Hand.

3This is true despite the fact that provincials may rely on magazines for a substitute for what they would derive from residence in Paris, i.e., that sense of being 'where a ul the chief function of La Nouvel ()bservaleur ).

3Because the opportunities offered by the cultural environment are most profitably exploited by those with the highest cultural capital, and because the conformityining pressre  e roup   member  wihcltural cpi gaps between the Parisians and the provincials become more pronounced ar higher levels of education.

32.Georges Perec's novel Les choses (Paris, Julliard, 1965) captures in its own way the relationship which a couple of these mystified mysrifers (social psychologists working in a market research agency)entertain with things whose whole value lies in the words used about chem.

See M.Vill, L r a  e 96Ac  , 64-74.

34. One of the many determinants which incline the members of the new occupations to a subversive representation of the relations between the sexes is the fact that it is in the middle class—and especially, no doubt, its new fractions—that women most frequently have higher educational qualifications or occupational status than their husbands, and that the husbands' higher occupational stacus—- given identical qualifications—is, no doubt, most resented.

35.Anticipating the point of view of the old morality on what can only be, in these terms, a sort of 'unthinkable', Kant writes: 'An obligation to enjoyment is a patent absurdity. And the same, then, must also be said of a supposed obligarion to actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spiritually this enjoyment be refined in thought (or embellished), and even if it be a mystical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment.'1. Kant, The Critique of Judgement, trans. J. C. Meredith (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1952), p. 48n.

3.M. Wolfenstein, 'The Emergence of Fun Morality' in E. Larrabee and R. Meyersohn, eds., Mass Leisure (Glencoe, Ill., Free Press, 1958), pp. 8697.

37. As readers of avant-garde film criticism well know, jouir/jouissance can be eroticized by playing on its colloquial meaning, 'to come' (translator).

The endeavr tjecty sal eh—epcially  yog n there - gressively imposed one--of course entails many dangers; lucidity may be no more than the effect of adherence to a contrary ethic. Each of the words used to characterize two an tagonistic moralities can, of course, function as insults for champions of the opposite morality; it is therefore futile to hope to find a perfectly 'neutral' tone (the psychoanalytic vulgate, for example, will identify 'ascetic' with 'maso. chistic'). In each case, one would need to restore the experiential content of what is sociologically objectifed (e.g., the heroic dimension of the ascetic striving for vircue, which takes its pleasure in effort and in the exaltation of self-transcendence, or the generous innocence of the liberationist culr, which is based on an acute sense of the absurdity of social constraints and stakes); and, as has constantly been done here, the dispositions described have to be referred to their conditions of production: repressive dispositions, for example, have to be seen as the product of repression (or social regression).

39. If the opposition between politicization and psychologization is carried too far, it may be forgotten that participation in a community of activists can also offer a solution to existential diffculties--tven when these are not the exclusive reason for joining--by providing all the assurances and reassurances of immersion in an integrated, separate, self-contained group, with its own laws, language and ritual, demanding and recognizing devotion and sacrifice; see D. Mothe, Le métier de militant (Paris, Seuil, 1973). But reducing the logic of activism to that of group therapy may equally obscure the fact that psychological transactions, in particular the exchange of devotion and recognition ('the comrades' confidence'), are only the experiential (but not on that account negligible) form of much deeper transactions between the 'total institution'-which, demanding total dependence, gives most to rhose who give it most of what they are and have outside of it—and its members, who give it most (and receive most) when they expect most from it and have or are least outside of it.

Scc P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory o Practice Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1977), pp. 92-93.

41. See N. Elias, The History of Manners (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1978), and State Formation and Civilization (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1982), vols. I and II of Thbe Civilizing Process.

42. Though with no more evidence than the observacions of ordinaty existence and the indirect indications provided by our survey, I am inclined to think that the devotees of the sects organized around the new forms of bodily exercise are mainly recruited among the women of the new pecite bourgeoisie, and that the theme of the liberated body takes its place in a problematic with a strong religious colouring (at least in its vocabulary) which also includes the 'problems of the couple', 'women's liberation'etc.

It is no surprise hat the people hould be o horri by evey form  solgical objectification and so fascinated by psychological or psychoanalytical enchantment. Nor that they should be ready to applaud all the fashionable variants o the old personalist denunciation of scientic 'reductionism' the elementary form of intellectual aristocratism, which has received unexpected reinforcement from the identifcation of every attempt at scientic objectification of pracces with an ethical, even political condemnation (with the theme 'science = Gulag', which has enabled some well-worn post-Heideggerian fossils co make an unlooked-for come-back in the intellectual weeklies). Nor that the existence of a scientifc sociology is as improbable as ever in times when the position of sociologist is one of the refuges for those intent on escaping classification.

cC dynamics'; Wilhelm Reich, psychoanalyst (translator's note).

aicL sté é ven Fayard, 1961).
