> 来源：Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice)\Distinction A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Pierre Bourdieu, Richard Nice).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 8. Culture and Politics

1.K.Marx and F. Engels The German Ideology, nd e. London, Lawrenceand Wishart, 1974), p. 109.

H   nlcalsity Press, 1977).

Slar  ucdel en possible artistic positions.

5.This very general relationship is also found in the area of artistic competence, where subjective exclusion ('That doesn't inreresr me' or 'That's not for the likes of us') is only the effect of an objective exclusion.

6 It is not possible, in the present state of research, to grasp the logic of the variazation at different times (a series of IFOP surveys on nuclear energy, undertaken in 1974, 1975, 1976 and 1977). Everyching suggests, in any case, that these variations remain smaller than the variations in the different expressed opinions.

7. G. Michelat and M. Simon, 'Catégories socio-professionnelles en milieu ouvrier et comportement politique', Revue Française de Science Politique, 25 (April 1975), 291316.

8The slightly higher figure for men may well be due to the fact that the question explicitly calls for the appreciation of a principle: 'Do you think that girls of 18 should (il faut) be allowed to sce the films they want to?" (IFOP, March 1971).

9. 'Do you think that in industrial disputes the Government supports the workers' demands, supports the employers' interess, or is neutral?' (SOFREs, October 1970).

10. 'Among the following trade unions and political parties, who, in your view, best defends employees' interests at the present time—UDR, Centrists, PCF, CFDT, CGT, PS, CGT.FO? (IFOP, 2 February 1980.)

11. 'In your view, is there or is there not a link berween the Middle East conflict and the Vietnam War?" (IFOP, 9 October 1967). (President de Gaulle had just 2sserted that there was-—translator.)

1. Similar distributions (43.4 percent of 'don't knows' among women, 19.6 percent among men, 38.9 percent among the least educated, 9.4 percent among the best euated are observed on a question on forcign poliy:Are you satisfiedor dissawi he Govere pefoctefollowrs policy?" (IFOP 1966).

The link berween indiffeience and impotence has been noted by varius observers, for example: D. Riesman and N. Glazer, 'Criteria for Political Apathy', in A. W. Gouldner, ed., Studies in Leadership (New York, Russell and Russell, 1965), pp. 505-559; E. Kris and N. Leites, 'Trends in Twentieth-Century Propaganda', in G. Roheim, ed., Psychoanalysis and the Social Sciences (New York, IUP, 1947), esp. p. 400.

1E. Deutsch, D. Lindon and P. Weill, Les famills politiques aujourd'bui em France (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1966), pp. 104-105.

1.On political activists in general, the main sources consulted were as follows: J Lagroye, G. Lord, L. Monnier-Chazel and J. Palard, Les militants politiques dans trois partis français: PC, PS, UDR (Paris, Pedone, 1976); M. Kesselman, 'Systeme de

pouvoir et cultures politiques au sein des partis politiques français', Revue Française de Sociologie, 13 (Octoher-December 1972). On Socialist activists: R. Cayrol, 'Les militants du Parti socialiste, contribution àune sociologi',Proje, 88 Seember-October 1974); H. Portelle and T. Dumias, 'Militants socialistes à Paris', Projet, 101 (January 1976); L'Unite, no. 257, 1-6 July 1977; 'Qui sont les cadres du PS?', Le Point, no. 249, 27 June 1977. On Communist activists: F. Platone and F. Subileau, Les militants communistes de la Fédération de Paris (Paris, Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, 1975). And on the Deputies: R. Cayrol, J.C. Parodi and C. Ysmal, Le député français (Paris, Armand Colin, 1973); and M. Dogan, 'Les filières de la carricre politique' Revue Française de Sociologie, 8 (1967), 468-492.

1.These conclusions are based on a summary statistical analysis of the findings of a preliminary survey by extended interview (n = 130), carried out in the Paris region in 1970. (The small sample obviously makes it impossible to see the regularities which emerge as anything more than indications of tendencies, which will be used here as illustrations rather than demonstrations. In the first stage, the respondents were given a set of 15 cards, each bearing the name of a movement, grouping or party, and were asked to group the cards as they wished (they were not explicitly asked to comment on the categories they applied or to attach names or descriptions to the groups they established). In the second stage, they were given a set of 24 cards, each bearing the name of a politician or trade unionist (one fictitious name, Philippon, was included, so as to measure reactions to an unknown name); they were first asked to say which group or party each individual belonged to, and then to group these cards.

17. At the risk of appearing sacrilegious, it has to be pointed out that it was in the name of the same faith in the legitimacy conferred by cultural competence (or, as it was often put at the time of the Popular Front, 'intelligence') that intellectuals were able to denounce the dangers of universal suffrage or, like Flaubert, to dream of te reign of the mandarins; just as they now feel both entitled and obliged, by virtue of their essence, to produce and profess their opinions on the great problems of the day.

18. The respondents were presented with a list of 17 problems and invited to say which they thought were political.

1This survey was carried out by the publication of a questionnaire in a large number of daily and weekly papers, between 1 and 15 August 1969, at the request of the Association for the Expansion of Scientific Research (AEERS). (The fact that L'Humanité and Le Parisien Libéré did not publish it undoubtedly contributed to the under-representation of the working classes.) The questionnaire contained 20 questions on the organization of the school year, the situation of education, the changes in curriculum, teaching methods and university organization, the training, selection and salaries of teachers, the relations between teachers, parents and pupils or students, the powers of the diff erent categories of staff, the functions of education (vocationaltraining, 'character-building' erc.), politics in educational establishments, the raising of the school-leaving age, subsidies for Church schools etc. It was preceded by a text of varying length, depending on the newspaper, presenting the survey as a 'full-scale national consultation' on a 'subject of capital importance' organized 'with the kind assistance of the press' by the AEERs, 'an indepcndent, non-profit-making movement'.

The 'events' f May 1968 started with a sudent uprising in Paris, turned into a general strike and seemed to threaten the whole Gaullist regime. When order was restored, the new Minister of Education initiated reforms of the educational system. (Translator's note.)

This population, in which the different groups are represented in proportion to their pretension to influence the educational system, is perfectly representative of the self-legitimated pressure group which has always managed to exert is inflence, at every level of the system. The idées-forces it expressed thus forerold what indeed subsequently came to pass: for example, the 'great majority'—for once the term is appropriare—of the respondents desired the continuation of the recruitment competicions (agrégation etc.), the introduction of selection, che maincenance of the grandes écoles, more emphasis on both general culcure (for themselves) and vocational training (for other people) etc. On all the points on which comparison was possible (i.e., all the questions except those on the grandes écoles and the agrégation, which no survey institute has ever asked), the rensample.

It goes wichour saying thar these capacities and dispositions are linked to those whi  nee inordr o t pen  paer  answer a uesionnae, whi in turn linked to educational capical. Echical dispositions exert a specifc effct here, which is clearly seen when the respondent is invited to put in regular, pro longed work, as in panel surveys. (Thus the rate of response to the CESP surveys, in which the respondent has to nore every quarter of an hour, for a month, the radio stations he has been listening to, varies to some extent wich the culcural goodwill that is manifested in scholastic zeal. It is highest among junior execucollecting etc.) One ought also to consider the specific effects of selection by newspaper, and endeavour to derermine how far the fact that the enquiry was cransmicred chrough the reader's usual newspaper rather chan, for example, through the schools, an association, a union or a party may have affected the make-up of the population of respondents (for example, newspaper subscribers responded more ofren than occasional readers).

22. The parents who returned their questionnaires to the Cornec Federation of parents'associations (rather chan directly to the AEERS) differ overall from the other parents by a lower social and educational level and by the higher proportion of female respondents. This suggests that previous mobilization within an organization and the addicional 'authority' conferred by this membership tend to increase the propensity to intervene politically, other chings being equal. (This would perhaps explain why, among the reachers, the spontaneous, non-affiliared respondents have very different characteristics from the 'pedagogic' activists, mainly recruiced among women agrégées and cerrified (non-agrégé) men; sce J. M. Chapoulie and D. Merllié, Les déterminants sociaux et scolaires des pratiques professionnelles des enseignants du second degré et leurs trans formations [Paris, CSE, 1974], esp. pp. 120-124.) It is remarkable that the Cornec Federation parents, under-selected in respect of social and cultural capital, are, although more mobilized, generally slighly less inclined to answer the varius quesins, exce (in particular) the one on subsidies for Church education, for which they have a higher rate of response.

23. CET: Collège d'enseignement technique (secondary technical school); CEG: Collège d'enseignement générale (general secondary school'). (Translator's nore.)

Every atrempt to persuade the members of the working classes to express their vis the ocial worl heirimag e class stucure)cesu aist the diffculty created by this sense of imporence and unworthiness ('I don't see why people like you come and ask blokes like me—you know all that berter than I do'). On the other hand, part of the horror aroused by sociology stems from the c ha i questins y Tom, Dickor Harry insteo consulng only e - thorized spokesmen.

2This analysis has the virtue of showing thar, by emphasizing the dominant agents ('great men') or personifed collective entities, school history conveys a charismatic philosophy of history which leaves no room for social interests or the conflicts berween antagonistic groups and which calls for moral judgements rather than critical refection on historical processes and their social condicions.

26. It is not uncommon for the demands of personal salvation (evening classes or docility towards superiors) to come into confict with the demands of collective salfrom two totally opposed visions of the social world. Efforts at retraining or in ternal promotion (competitions etc.) would not be so positively sanctioned were it not that, in addicion to technical improvement, they also guarantee adherence to the insticution and to the social order.

27. One could point to a vast literature produced by the champions of the 'medical order' to defend the uniqueness of the medical art, freely performed by a free (and solicary) individual, or the indignant prorestations of the universicy establishment at the call for the recognition of collective student projects.

28. This proposition, which has its equivalent in aesthetics, is a particular case of the more general proposition that the propensicy and capacity ro subordinate verbal or practical position-takings to explicit principles, which, as such, are subject to an intentional systematization (those of an ethic or aesthetic or a political theory, established as much through the condicions of existence necessary for rhe acquisition of such capital as through the effect of the specific abilities it gives.

29. To demonstrate the analogy berween surveys and voring, one would have to analyse both the political philosophy implied in the questioning itself and that which is implied in the methods of analysis (in particular, the purely aggregative logic of statistics). It would be seen that the survey most overtly reveals its true nature when, aiming to predict the result of an election or referendum, it invites the respondents to give the equivalent of a vore.

f  pnt u th wo-s    ce   , where, as has often been shown, consumers choose a producer or distriburor (a shop, a cheatre, a radio station etc.) and, chrough this choice, the pre-selected producrs they offer—when they do not simply delegate this choice to mandared experts, such as decorators, archirects, and other vendors of aesthetic services, who play a  smewhat smilar i sc matters tohat  e pry.

Thus party membership or llegiance s nly one factor among others, whose - fects could be studied in the same way as the effects of sex, age or occupation. Specifically political principles function as factors, relatively autonomous of economic and social determinants, which (alchough adherence to these principles is not independent of these dererminants) make it possible to produce opinions or practices contrary to immediare personal interest.

32. Of all intellectuals, Sartre is no doubt the one who fel most "authentically'the opposition berween the abstract reality of 'commitment', which is always experienced as arbitrary inasmuch as it is the product of a deliberate choice, and the opacity of a choice imposed by the condicions of existence.

3This analysis is based on the findings of a post-1968 survey of a sample of 3,288 men, including 176 members of the intellectual occupations, presented by Mattéi Dogan to a French Political Science Association colloquium on workers and politics in western Europe.

Se MLipser, 'Sudents nd Politic inComparative Perspective Daedalus, Winter 1968, pp. 120. For a critique based on analysis of a survey of French students, see also Y. Delsaur, 'Les opinions politiques dans le système des attitudes les érudiants en letres er la politique', Revue Française de Sociologie, II (January-March 1970), 3-33.

35. It is no accident that the procuration (or assistance) which is the pre-condition of access to policical opinion for those who are deprived of the means of production of 'personal opinion' is one of the more or less skilfully masked targers of conservavo 'evolutnary conservative'thoght;  . Bourdieu, Lntolog poli tique de Martin Heidegger', Actes, 56 (November 1975), 109-156.

As  s éiE Socl.

37.As independent producers of their own discourse, intellectuals always tend to demand thar theinstiutions claiming a monopoly  the legitmae productin o ment of opinion. In this respect, the ecological movement, which refuses to be. apparatuses, represents the materialized ideal of the intellectual party. (In the present French electoral system, parties less well placed in the first round customarily urge their voters to transfer their vores to another party in the second round—translator.)

Part socialiste nifé, a small left-wing party founded in960, characez by anti-statism and ideas of autogestion (translator).

In 1966 de Gaulle withdrew French forces from NATO command (translator).

Here, too, there is a clear analogy with the cultural market.Could 'taste'unction as an internalized system of classifcation if it were suddenly deprived of all the markers, all the objectife classifcations and, in particular, all the indices of position in the field of production provided by places of publication and exhibition etc. which point the way to what Flaubert called 'the smart opinion?

For  casse  hee hees S. .Lipe cy n W Class Authoritarianism', American Sociological Review, 24 (August 1959), 482-501.

42 He meant, It's against the interests of wage-carners (la masse salariée)'; masse salariale means the total wage bill (translator).

43. This discourse, totally opposed to the homogeneity of the 'pure' products of an ethos or a political axiomatics, takes particular forms which could only be completely accounted for by describing (just as Bachelard describes 'epistemological profiles the 'political profles'drawn by practices or discourses generated accord ing to different principles, in different situations, i.e., in contexts in which the ef. fects of political inculcation or specifically political control are very unequally exerred.

44. What distinguishes these organizations in the universe of educational institutions is no doubt the fact that they perform their educative action within the primary groups, through agents-—the activists—-belonging to the group itself.

4This ethical liberalism can be traced back to its basis in the changes in the mode of reduction ohe dominant class, whi  recorded in recent changs in - ily law. They have the effect of rendering the 'virtues' of the old bourgeoisie unnecessary or even dysfunctional (the very virtues which the traditionalists, condemned to social decline by their inability to reconvert, strive to perpetuate, as if they regarded the reversal of bourgeois values as the cause of the decline of which they are victims and pinned their hopes of social salvation on ethical restoration).

Michelat and Simon, 'Catégories socio-professionnelles en milieu ouvrier', esp. pp. 296297.

47. The Paris newspapers devote to international affairs, anecdotal news (faits divers) and sport, respectively, 14.8 percent, 8.8 percent and 8.9 percent of their space;i the provincial press these proportions are reversed: 7.9 percent, 8.4 percent and 16.5 percent; J. Kayser, Les quotidiens français (Paris, Armand Colin, 1963), PP. 125-i27. These differences would be even more marked if the national papers whose readership is mainly drawn from the dominant class (like Le Monde, Le Figaro) were separated from the others, which (at least in the case of Le Parisien Lbive smuch space o aits divers nd ort  the provincial pres.

48In this struggle market rescarch is a weapon—in that it enables the newspper's pration demonstrated to advertiers, who provie  hih proportino a newspaper's income—-much more than a means of knowledge assisting a better response to the expectations of the readership.

49. As opposed to those publications which are excluded as too 'marked' from places where reading-matter is traditionally supplied-waiting rooms, cafés, hairdressing salons etc.—the 'omnibus' weeklies which are specially designed to offend no section of the potential clientele (Paris-Match, Jjours de France, L'Express) are perfectly adapted to the situations in which they are asked to perform this very biul

0.One of the senior editors of a major 'quality' newspaper, asked if he would have published an interview with a notorious criminal, like the editors of a weekly magazine which had just been prosecuted for doing so, replied, 'Of course, but in indirect speech.'

Dogan, 'Les filieres de la carrire politque. Force Ouvrire is the unin ornation created in 1947-48 by anti-Communists who split away from the CGT— translator).

52. The proportion of under-25s in the readership, insignificant for Le Figaro, is 25 pernt in the case of Le Nouvel Observateur; and it is remarkable that the paers which have declined most severely in the last ten years are, along with the omnibus papers (Le Parisien Libéré and France-Soir), L'Aurore and Le Figaro, with their small proportion of young readers. Their decline and the rise of Le Monde and Le Nouvel Observateur very directly reflect the morphological changes in the dominant class in favour of the fractions richest in educational capital.

53. Just as what is transmitted through biological heredity is no doubt more stable than what is transmitted through cultural heredity, so the class unconscious inculcated by the conditions of existence is a more stable generative principle of judgements and opinions than explicitly constituted political principles, precisely because it is relatively independent of consciousness.

This does not exclud all the essentially ambiguous poliical posiions (the padigm of which is the 'conservative revolutionary' movement of pre-Nazi Germany), which no doubt reproduce, in their indeterminacy, the contradictions inherent in the revolt against social decline (a sort of contradiction in terms) or in the mismatch between individual trajectory and collective trajectory

55. This strategy is very common in interpersonal relations, and especially in the economy of domestic exchanges, in which the impeccability acquired by services rendered allows the benefactor the rôle of a living reproach.

56. To understand the political practices and opinions of old people, one has to consider not only the withdrawal effect which, with retirement from the work milieu and the weakening of social relations, tends to reduce collective pressure and support, but also, and especially, the effect of social decline, which is stronger and mor rapi in less privileged classes and can no doubt beunderstood by ly with the effect of declining social trajectories on individuals or groups.

57. The unification of the economic and symbolic market and the corresponding weakening of locally based social spaces tends to favour the 'politicization' of peasant farmers, who, increasingly affected by the mechanisms of the economy and political decisions, have an increasing interest in being interested in politics. Although 'politicization' is not, as it is for industrial workers, necessarily equivaand conservatism itself takes on a quite different meaning.

58. On this point, sce P. Bourdieu, Le sens pratique (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1979).

59. This relative indeterminacy of the ethos with respect to the positions expressed no doubt explains the oscillations (e.g., between Gaullism and the Communist Party) of the most deprived fraction of the working class.

G. This is the question de Gaulle put to the nation in a referendum in 1969 (translator).

## Conclusion

1. I. Kant, Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Carbondale and Edwardsville, Southern Illinois University Press, 1978), p. 141.

.G. W. Leibniz, 'Medirationes de cognitione, veritate et ideisin Opuscula Philosophal Selectars Boivin,   l Disur Méaphysiqu Liiz evokes, in diin ohe example  colours, asts nmell whi can distinguish 'by the simple evidence of the senses and not by statable marks', the example of painters and artists who can recognize a good or bad work but cannot justify their judgement except by invoking the presence or absence of a jc ne sais quoi.'

3. It would be the task of a genetic sociology to establish how this sense of possibilities and impossibilities, proximities and distances is constituted.

4.Just as the opposition between the unique and the multiple lies at the heart of the dominant philosophy of history, so the opposition, which is a transhigured form of it, berween the brilliant, the visible, the distinct, the distinguished, the 'outstanding', and the obscure, the dull, the greyness of the undifferentiared, indistinct, inglorious mass is one of the fundamental categories of the dominant perception of the social world.

Se G.uLmG

6. E. Durkheim, Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (London, Allen and Unwin, 1915), p. 17.

7.A more detailed account of the theorerical context of these analyses will be found in P. Bourdieu, "Symbolic Power" in Identity and Structure, ed. D. Gleeson (Drif.- field, Nafferon Books, 1977), pp. 112-119; also in Critique of Antbropology, 4 (Summer 1979), 77-85.

C .P.Sr Bei  otsMe . 562.

9. See H. Giles, 'Accent Mobility: A Model and Some Data', Antbropological Linguistics, 15 (1973), 87-105.

1. See G. Lenski, 'American Social Classes: Statistical Strata or Social Groups?, American Journal of Sociology, 58 (September 1952), 139-144.

11. These divergences also emerge, in the same survey, when the respondents are first asked to define social classes ar the level of their town and then at the level of the whole country; the rate of non-response rises strongly in the latter case, as does the number of classes perceived.

12. Ordinary perception, which applies to practices the scheme of the broad and the narrow, or the expansive and the constrained, anticipares the discoveries of the most refined social psychology, which esrablishes the existence of a correlation between the room one gives oneself in physical space and the place one occupies in social space. On this point, sce S. Fisher and C. E. Cleveland, Body Image and Personality (New York, Van Nostrand, 1958).

13. This is true in the ordinary sense but also in the sense of Kafka [proces = 'process' but also 'trial'—cf. Kafka's Die Prozess, The Trial, Le Proces in French—translator], who offers an exemplary image of this desperate striving to regain a social identity that is by definition ungraspable, being the infinite limi of all caregoremes, ll imputations.

14. The sophism of the heap of wheat and all the paradoxes of physical continua mean, as Poincaré observed, that one has simultaneously A = B, B = C and A < C, or again, $\mathbf { A } _ { 1 } = \mathbf { A } _ { 2 } , \mathbf { A } _ { 2 } = \mathbf { A } _ { 3 } , . . . \mathbf { A } _ { \infty } = \mathbf { A } _ { 1 0 0 }$ and $\mathbf { A } _ { 1 } < \mathbf { A } _ { 1 ( \infty ) }$ In other words, though it is clear that one grain does not make a heap, nor do two grains, or three, it is not casy to say whether the heap begins at 264 grains or 265; in other words, whether 265 grains make a heap, but not 264.

soral', Actes, 3 (1975), 6893.

1.See Duby, Les trois ordres, esp. pp. 422-423.

17. Ibid., pp. 63-64, and 'Lcs "jeunes" dans la société arisrocrarique dans la France du Nord-Ouest au Xllème siècie', Annales, 19 (September-October 1964), 835- 846.

18. Much the same could be said of women, were they not denied most of the advantages of renouncing responsibility, at least outside the bourgeoisie.

Billing n.Tael SocialCateoizaion an Smilariy  Inter-gro B haviour', European Journal of Social Psychology, 3 (1973), 27-52.

See, for example, H. Tajfel, Quantitative Judgement in Social Perception', British Journal of Psychology, 50 (1959), 16-21, and H. Tajfel and A. L. Wilkes, 'Classification and Quantirative Judgement', ibid., 54 (1963), 101-104: and for an overview of research in this area, W. Doise, L'articulation psycbosociologique et les relations entre groupes ( Brussels, A. de Boeck, 1976), pp. 178-200.

21. 'Wherever the groups and classes are set in sharp juxtaposition, the values and mores of each are juxtaposed. Out of group opposition there arises an intense opposition of values, which comes to be projected through the social order and serves to solidify social stratification'. L. Copeland, 'The Negro as a Contrast Conception' in E. Thompson, ed., Race Relations and the Race Problem (Durham, Duke University Press, 1959), pp. 152-179.

22. '. . . le pouvoir unificateur du nom, du mot d'ordre'—the unifying power of the name/noun, the rallying cry ('order word'). (Translator's note.)

23. One scarcely needs to point out the affinity berween social physics and the posiivist inclination to see classifications either as arbitrary, 'operational' divisions (such as age groups or income brackets) or as 'objective'cleavages (discontinuities in distributions or bends in curves) which only need to be recorded.

24. Here is a particularly revealing expression (even in its metaphor) of this social marginalism: 'Each individual is responsible for the demeanour image of himself and the deference image of others, so thar for a complete man to be expressed, individuals must hold hands in a chain of ceremony, each giving deferentially with proper demeanour to the one on the righr what will be received deferentially from the one on the left.' E. Goffmann, 'The Nature of Deference and Demeanour', American Antbropologist, 58 (June 1956), 473-502. . . . routinely the quescion is thar of whose opinion is voiced most frequently and most forcibly, who makes the minor ongoing decisions apparently required for the coordination of any joint acrivity, and whose passing concerns have been given the most weight. And however trivial some of these little gains and losses may appear to be, by summing them all up across all the social situations in which they occur, we can see that their total effect is enormous. The expression of subordination and domination through this swarm of sicuational means is more than a mere tracing or symbol or ritualistic affirmation of the social hierarchy. These expressions considerably constitute the hierarchy.' E. Goffmann, 'Gender Display'. (Paper presented at the Third International Symposium, 'Female Hierarchies', Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation, April 3-5, 1974); italics mine.

## Postscript

1. M. Proust, 'En mémoire des églises assassinées' in Pastiches et mélanges (Paris, Gal. limard, 1970), p. 171.

2. For an aesthetic explicitly based on the antithesis of the beautiful and the facile, see S. Alexander, Beauty and Other Forms of Value (London, Macmillan, 1933), esp. pp. 40, 164. (In French, facile corresponds to both 'facile' and 'easy'—translator.)

Given inEnglish inhe text, and describe as more distinguished than it French equivalent, racoleur (translator).

On several occasions, and in particular in an article on he relationship beween psychoanalysis and art history—Meditations on a Hobby Horse (London, Phaidon Press, 1963), esp. pp. 37-4-E. H. Gombrich refers to the refusal of elementary, vulgar gratifications which is the basis of legitimate taste, or the 'fashionable d',  e call em,  easly pick whic dee lgiase, p. 146).

.  Schopenuer, The World as Wil and Idea (Lonn, Routege nd Kegan Paul, 1883), vol. I, bk. I, pp. 268269.

On the essential points, Schopenhauer's aesthetic can be regarded as a somewhat heavy commentary on Kant's aesthetic, and Fauconnet is quite justified in observing: 'Aesthetic judgement, which is essentially disinterested, is opposed in Kant's work to other, self-interested judgements, exactly as, in Schopenhauer, the voluntary action of the subject who knows only with a view to action is opposed to the contemplarion of the pure subject.'A. Fauconnet, L'esthétique de Schopenbauer (Paris, Alcan, 1913), p. 108.

By he sme token, Brecht's alienation effectmight be the ap whereby, wi pular art itsel the intellectual asserts his distance from popular art, which mak popularart acceptable, i.., acceptable to intellectuals, and, t a deeperlv h istan pe,he  pe b enellea' ship of the people.

8It was 'refusal', says Kant, which 'brought about the passage from merely sensual to spiritual attractions.' I. Kant, 'Conjectural Beginnings of Human History' in History, e L W. BeckIndnapolis and New ork, Bobb-Merril , P. 57. Having indicated that sexual attraction 'can be prolonged and even increased by means of the imagination' when 'its object is removed from the senses', Kant links the discovery of beauty to sublimation of the sexual instinct and concludes: 'Refusal was the feat which brought about the passage from merely sensual to spiritual attractions, from mere animal desire gradually to love, and along with this from the feeling of he merely agreeable to a taste for beauty' (ibid.).

Here and subsequenrly in the text, page numbers in parentheses refer to I. Kant, Critique of Judgement, trans. J.C.Meredith (London, Oxford University Press, 1952).

10. The specific force of the agreeable is manifested in the fact that it demands an immeiate satisfaction of desie, preventing 'he conscious expecation ofthe ue 'This capacity for facing up in the present to the often very distant future, instead of being wholly absorbed by the enjoyment of the present, is the most decisive mark of the human's advantage.' 'Conjectural Beginnings', pp. 57-58.

11. Ibid., p. 55.

12. Paragraph 41, entitled 'The empirical interest in the beautiful', alludes to what Elias calls 'the process of civilisation'—'Only in society does it occur to him to be not merely a man, but a man more refned after the manner of his kind (the beginning of civilisation) . . . '—but only to cast it into the merely empirical in a single sentence: 'This interest, indirectly attached to the beautiful by the inclination towards society, and, consequently, empirical, is, however, of no importance for us here' (Critique of Judgement, pp. 155-1 56, and also 132). Another example of recognition of the social dimension of taste: 'A judgement upon an object of our delight may be wholly disinterested but withal very interesting, it relies on no interest, but it produces one. Of this kind are all pure moral judgements. But, of themselves, they do not even set up any interest whatsoever. Only in society is it interesting to have taste' (ibid., pp. 43-44, note).

1.Of music, Kant says that it is more a matter of enjoyment than of cultur'bid. p. 194). And later he implicily identifies the degree to which the arts 'cultivate' the mind with the 'expansion of the faculties' they call for: 'If, on the other hand, we estimate the worth of the fine arts by the culture they supply to the mind, and aop or ur sandard the epansin o e acul whos confuenc in e ment is necessary for cognition, music . . has the lowest place' (ibid., p.195). B   e c  t   , position that it is capable of being enhanced by charm, this is a common error and y reudicial ene,nc caseNevertes, harm e    e l v delight inthe representation of the object, and thus to advocate taste and icul tivation. This applies especially where taste is as yet crude and untrained' (ibid., p. 67; italics mine); 'he may even begin to harbour doubts as to whether he has formed his taste upon an acquaintance with a sufficient number of objects of a particular kind ..(ibid., p.; 'he rectification and extension of our judgement taste' (ibid., p. 141).

15. Some indices of Kant's inclination to identify the universal with the universe of cultivated people: 'One would scarce think it necessary for a man to have taste to take more delight in a circle than in a scrawled outline, in an cquilateral thanin at s llos,an s  were,deoThe reqmnt italics mine); 'We demand both taste and feeling of every man, and, granted some e oc    ae ibid., p. 147n.

16. Pointing out the very early link between still life and the vanitas motif—e.g., the timepiece symbolizing temperance—Gombrich acknowledges that the 'Puritan spirit' may find in this reminder an alibi for or antidote to the 'simple pleasures of the senses' offered by 'gorgeous flowers and appealing dishes', an immortalization of sensual enjoyment that 'feasts the eye and stirs up memories and anticipations o    ceeat pl facto also a vanitas' because 'the pleasures it stimulates are not real, they are mere illusions' (Meditations on a Hobby Horse, p. 104).

17. It is clear what is hidden in the Sollen contained in the apparently constative utterances in which Kant presents the definition of pure taste.

18. It follows that the mere intention of speaking scientifically about works of art or aesthetic experience or, more simply, of abandoning the style of the smart essay, which is less concerned with truth than originality, is bound to be seen as one of the sacrilegious degradations which reductive materialism indulges in, and therefore as the expression of a philistinism which denounces what it is incapable of wo eO   rv pendix 4, note 10-translator.)

. The most systematic attempt in recent times to formulate this ideology is no doubt that by Malraux. Art, for Malraux, is the realm of freedom, and, as such, it is the symbol of man's power to create a significant, fully human world or, at the very least, of man's eternal struggle to transcend servitude and 'humanize the world.'

By treating the work in accordance with its intention, i.e., as a finality withour an end, the beholder re-produces the act of creation, in a mimesis of the mimesis of Genesis. (The theory of 'creative reading' is also one of the ideological themes whc, becaus hendenble  eaffan  theial po honour' of the literate bourgeoisie, are endlessly reinvented.)

21. In that text, disdained by the commentators (who, because of its apparent triviality, have even wondered if it was not a product of senility), Kant first distin. guishes between 'scholars', whether 'incorporated' (in the University guild) or independent', and mere 'men of lerters' (businessmen and technicians of scholarship'), 'priests, judges and doctors', who purvey knowledge acquired at the Universiry, and finally the clientele of the latter, 'the people, which is composed of ignoramuses'. He then contrasts the temporally dominant 'higher' faculties, law, medicine and theology, with the temporally dominated bur spiritually dominant 'lower' faculty, that of philosophy, which has no temporal power but is 'independent of the orders of government'; perfectly autonomous, knowing only its own laws, those of reason, it is thereby entitled to exercise its critical power in total freedom. I. Kant, The Conflict of the Faculties (New York, Abaris Books, 1979).

22.N. Elias, The Civilizing Process, vol. I, The History of Manners (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1978), p. 9.

3.I. Kant, 'Idea for aUniversal History' in On History, p.1.

24. Kant, 'Conjectural Beginnings', pp. 5556.

25. Kant, 'Idea for a Universal History', p. 21. Elias shows how the opposition between the court arisrocracy and the cultured bourgeoisie was built up around the contrasr between, 'on the one hand, superficiality, ceremony, formal conversation, [and] on the orher, inwardness, depth of fecling, immersion in books, developmen  the ndividual pernali—n short, between hesuperficial and tedeep ( The Civilizing Process, I, 19). The whole of the second term of the opposition is contained in the 'slow efforts to improve the mind' ro which Kant refers.

26. 'But thar there is any intrinsic worth in the real existence of a man who merely lives for enjoyment, however busy he may be in this respect, even when in so doing he serves others—all equally with himself intent only on enjoyment—as an excellent means ro that end, and does so, moreover, because through sympathy he shares all their grarifications,--rhis is a view to which reason will never let itselfbe brought round' (Critique of Judgement, p. 47). And in a footnote Kant denounces the 'supposed obligarion ro actions that have merely enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spiritually this enjoyment be refined in thought (or embellished), and even if it be a mysrical, so-called heavenly, enjoyment' (ibid., p. 48n).

27. Another indication of this can be seen in the fact that Kant argues in favour of the scholastic reaching of art and the need to submit to rules. This is perfectly in accord wirh the logic of his subterranean discourse in defense of the academic values of Kultur, but in contradiction to his refusal of any empirical genesis of ta which ough o makehim subscri he theory ntrmmell ns (which he precisely combats—Critique of Judgement, p. 183).

28. The invariants of the professorial condition, and more especially of the posirion of the teaching profession within the dominant class (a dominated fraction) and within the class held as a whole, are suffciently great, despite differences of epoch and society, to establish affnities of ethos which are the basis of the illusion of universality.

29.Would-be systematic thinking applies its universally applicahle schemes to every object. This can lead to some amusing efects, typical of what Schopenhauer calls 'comic pedantry', when these schemes (the same ones that are at work in the Critique of Judgement, but there with every appearance of necessity) are too obviously running in neutral: 'I have outlived a good many of my friends or acquaintances who boasted of perfecr health and lived by an orderly regimen adopted once and for alwhile the see o death ilness ay themnoic ready to develop. They felt healthy and did not know they were ill; for while the cause of natural dearh is always illness, causality cannot be felt. It requires understanding, whose judgment can err. Feeling, on the other hand, is infallible; but we do not call a man ill unless he feels ill, although a disease which he does not feel . . ' etc. Kant, Con flict of the Faculties, p. 181.

0.J. Derrida, La vérité en peinture (Paris, Flammarion, 1978).

31. Ibid., p. 51.

3.Philosophical denial is here merely a particular form of artistic denial which, as is clearly seen in the case of music, is inseparable from a neutralizarion or denial of the political and social: 'If Faust represents the German soul,' writes Thomas Mann, 'then he must be a musician; for the German's relationship to the world is abstract and mystical, in other words, musical.' T. Mann, 'Deutschland und die Deutschen', Essays, I1 (Frankfurt, Fischer Taschenbuch, 1977), 285.

33.Every field of scholarly production has its own 'rules' of propriety, which may remain implicit and only be known to iniriates; sometimes, however, scholars endeavour to codify them (for example, Boileau, Rapin, d'Aubignac or Subligny, who exhorted the authors of tragedies to eschew subjects likely to offend the political or moral ideas of the audience, to exclude scenes of bloodshed which might shock, to adapt their characters to the rules of aristocratic etiquette and to avoid crude or vulgar terms).

34. See G. Scholem, 'Der Nihilismus als religioses Phänomen', Eranos, 1974; and J. Habermas, 'Die verkleidete Thora' in Philosophisch-politische Profile, 2nd ed. (Frankfurt, Suhrkamp, 1981).

35. One would nced to make explicit not only the general properties of these borderli p, s  the ub mes te low  e ube pro secure, but also the double vulnerability, the doubling or objective and subjective uncertainty as to personal identity which they impose on their occupants.

36. Thus, Derrida denounces the artihciality and strain of applying the table of categories, established with respect to judgements of knowledge, to aesthetic judgement, which, as Kant constantly points out, is not a judgement of knowledge. Derrida, La vérité en peinture, pp. 79-83. By contrast, Louis Guillermit endeavours to show, through a comparison of the three Critiques, that Kant rethought his whole theory of sensibility—putting forward a new transcendental definition of feeling which breaks the link between feeling and the faculty of desiring—to make room for a new, disinterested type of pleasure, which he discovers in aesthetic judgement, contemplative pleasure; this pleasure is not linked to desire for the object and, indiferent as to its existence, is solely concerned with its representation. L. Guillermit, 'Esthétique et Critique' in H. Wagner, ed., Sinnlichkeit und Verstand in der deutschen undfranzösischen Philosophie von Descartes bis Hegel (Bonn, Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1976), pp. 122-150.

37. By treating the Critique as a beau tiful object, Derrida no doubt contradicts the deepest intention of Kant, who plays on the opposition hetween the frivolous and the serious—as is evidenced by the deliberately inaesthetic style—and seeks to place philosophy and the philosopher above art and the artist. But in doing so, Derrida grants the Critique the starus of an unconditioned ohject, freed from social determinants, which every pure, purely internal reading grants to the work; and which, by the same token, it grants to itself.

38. Proust, 'En mémoire des églises assassinées', p. 170; italics mine. In 'Journées de lecture', Proust further analyses the different perversions of reading—the scholarly perversion, which identifies the search for truth with the discovery of a secret document, demanding 'material trouble', and the perversion of 'the lettered man', who 'reads for the sake of reading and of retaining what he has read'. Pastiches et mélanes, pp40 'Days  Readign JL.Hevesi d Essa on Lanuge and Literature (London, Allan Wingate, 1947), pp. 52-55.

Pastiches et mélanges, p. 4n; 'Days of Reading' p.n.

## Appendix 1. Some Reflections on the Method

1.Such effects of fashion are also found in legitimate culture. Thus the social value of some of the works offered may have changed between 1963 and 1967, with the Four Seasons and Eine Kleine Nachtmusik being pulled towards 'middle-brow' culture by popularization

2. Wichin cach class and class fraction, a very similar number of incerviews was carried out in Paris and the Paris region and in the Nord region. The Nord is characterized by a very different occupational structure from that of the Paris region and by a much lower average level of educational qualification. The 1968 census found many more industrial and commercial entrepreneurs (large and smal) and fewer engineers, senior executives, rechnicians, junior executives and office workers in the Nord than in the Paris region. Except for primary teachers (relatively more numerous in the Nord), the fractions richest in culural capical seem under-represenced in chis region.

3.Ouvriers specialisés: 'a misleading cerm, since such workers are specialized in nothing except the execution of one narrow, repetitive task, usually on the assemblyline. For this they require lictle training, the English cerm "semi-skilled" would be y los uval .L. Hany,A.P. Ke n. H.Wis, Cn France: Politics and Society since 1945 (London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, i979), p. 75 (cranslator's noce).

Sec P. Bourdieu et al., Un art moyen (Paris, Ed. de Minuit, 1965), pp.73-84, and P. and M. C. Bourdieu, 'Le paysan et la photographie', Revue Française de Sociologie, ( April- June 1965), 164-174. In fact, chis exclusion would no doubt be much less justified now, in view of the far-reaching changes which have occurred, inter alia, in the relationship berween the peasantry and the educational system, all of them tending to unify the symbolic goods marker.

. It should also be noed that in the sample almost all the socio-occupational caegories have a higher average educational level and higher social origin chan in the INSEE surveys. It is not possible to establish exactly how far this is due to the hih proportion of Parisians sce note  above and how aro the more precise definition of the categories.

6. See Bourdieu, Un art moyen.

7. The same would of course apply to the judgements in the areas of incerior decoration, clothing or cooking. It is true that the analysis (which was in fact carried out) of some particularly representative inceriors might have brought out more clearly he concrete systemariciry of these sers of objects and of the relationships (very clearly visible in the non-directive interviews) which link them to other sers, such as clothing or tastes in music. But establishing the statistical regularicies presupposed developing the means of systematically grasping the most significant features of cach universe, and also entailed sacrificing the power to evoke the whole wealth of each particular realization of the structure.

8. To avoid treating the effect of variations in the measuring condicions as objective differences, all the differences in the nature of the indicators, the phrasing of the questions, the coding of the responses, the condicions of the survey and the structure of the sample, were systematically taken into account. For example, in one survey, hunting and fishing are grouped in a single question, in another separared ino two quescions; educational level is coded in five caregories in one case, in seven caregories in another.

9. The economics of publishing made it necessary to exclude many statistical tables (or, at least, to reduce them to synoptic presentation) and many diagrams and documents (interviews, photographs etc.) which made a real contribution to the analyses. For the same reason a bibliography which, even when reduced to the useful and used texts, would have been immense, is not princed here. The list of complementary sources of statistical information (appendix 2) did, however, seessential,  poviee ensableens  cation iey cases in which the data used in the analysis could be only partially reproduced.

Conforama: a chain of cheap furniure stores; Guy Lux: a popular entertainer (translator).

Twenty-four further questions on phoography re nor reproduced here Bourdieu, Un art moyen ).

## Appendix 2. Complementary Sources

1. I am particularly grateful to Mme. M. C. de la Godelinais and Mr. C. Thélot for having supplied the (mostly unpublished) tables which were needed for seconday analysis of the INSEE surveys whose findings are used here. My chanks also go Mr. P. Debreu, Mr. P. Leroux and Mr. P. Ghigliazza for generousy supplng Us wa   arv en européenne (sometimes wich secondary analysis), such as the survey of museumgoing sce P. Bourdieu and A. Darbel, L'amour de 'art [Paris, Ed.de Minui, 1, e urv  ses n cl ee P. Burd nd J.C.Ps, The Inberitors [Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1979]) or the survey of the studencs of the grandes écoles.

These are given for each 'ax'household (foyer). According to the INSEE deinicin, ahousoldmengns e rs iviiesmewe occupied as main residence ('usual address'), whatever the number of persons or their relationship to the holder of the tenure. For tax purposes, the foyer fiscal is mo narrowy i nclue hea he housolh souse y, and the perons recognized as his dependants for ax purposes, i.e., all the persons taxed together.

3.The data given here are for households (ménages ). For each socio-occupational category, consumption is also indicated per capita and per 'consumption unit'. According to the INSEE definicion, the number of consumption unics in a household is found by weighting as follows: first adule = 1 unit; each other adult = 0.7 unit; each child (under 14) = 0.5 unit.

4In reviewing the statistical sources, three bibliographical tools proved particularly useful: C. Guinchat, Bibliographie analhytique du loisir: France, 1966-1973 (Prague, Centre européen pour les loisirs er l'éducation, 1975); A. Willener and P. Béaud, Nouvelles tendances de la consommation culturelle: vers une troisieme culture (Paris and Cordes, CECMAS, 1972), which brings together quancitative data and survey findings on museums, photography, cinema, Tv, music etc; and the bibliographies of books and articles published each yeat from 1969 to 1973 on 'culcural development and action', compiled by the research department of the Ministry of Culture.

## Appendix 4. Associations: A Parlour Game

1.This sociological test reveals a logicat work in he area of poliics and images of the social world that is entirely similar to the logic found operating in the mychico-ricual practices of pre-capicalist societies. It chereby demonstrates that the clear-cut distinction social science makes berween 'primiive'or 'savage'thought and 'civilized' chought can only be due to ignorance.

In 7 thee poliicians occupied the following positions: Giscard d'Estaing, President; Chirac, Prime Minister, Gaullist leader; Marchais, leader of Communist Party; Micterrand, leader of Socialist Party; Poniatowski, Minister of the Interior; Servan-Schreiber, leader of the Radicals (briefly a minister in 1974; auchor of Le defi américain, published in 1967). (Translator's note.)

3.In France, yellow is the colour of the strike-breaker, the 'scab'; in the 1974 presidencial campaign, Servan-Schreiber sided wich Giscard against Miccerrand, and was rewarded with a ministry (translator).

Servan-Schreiber's Le déf américain (translator).

5. To measure the realism of this 'collective representation' one only has to look back at the phorograph of the Servan-Schreiber interior, near the end of chapter S.

6. Le gendre de Monsieur Poirier is a play on this rheme by Emile Augier and Jules Sandeau, published in 1854 (cranslator).

S Brui eoyPracmUy Press, 1977).

In addiion to the tables published in Sondages it was possible to analysethe distributions by sex, age-group and income group, bur the distributions by socio-occupational caregory were nor available.

It can be seen thar the respondents, when the series that is proposed allows them to (as it does here by offering a graduated series of pertinent symbols), make significant connections berween all the elements in the two series, instead of considering only two or three of them—as they do in most of the orher series, in which some of the elements are only defined negatively, by elimination (e.g., lilac and carnation in the fower series, and Chirac, or to a lesser exrent Poniatowski, in most of the series). This is an example of the effect inevitably produced by offering a fnile series of products which excludes possibilities consciously or unconsciously expecred (e.g., belote in the game series or red in the colour series) and offers abstract or unreal possibiliries which may attract some choices. Another example of the same effect is the attriburion of the ant to Giscard, faure de mieux; in a different context of possibilicies, the ant—hardworking, modest, thrifty, obstinate and, above all, small and numerous—would rather suggest the ascetic virtues of the perire bourgeoisie as opposed to the conspicuous improvidence of the aristocracy and bourgeoisie. (The finite-offer effect also explains why, of the rwo lirerary oppositions—the ant and the grasshopper, the fox and the crow-—only the first is used with the same logic as in the La Fontaine fable, while in the second, rately.)

w u le ular festivity, which has now been ousred by home entertainments (I am thinking of the analyses by Mikhail Bakhtin in his Rabelais and His World [Cambridge, Mass., M.I.T. Press, 1968]), works in this way, through the logic of the Sarurnalia, in which the usual order is rurned upside down symbolically and temporarily ('Non semper Sarurnalia erunt', said Seneca).

## Illustration Credits

Russell Lee, Farm Security Administration, 45; ELF-AQUITAINE, 46; Piet Mondrian, Broadway Boogie Woogie, 1942-43. Collection, The Museum of Modern Art, New York. Given anonymously, 51; Piet Mondrian, Painting I, 1926. Collection, The Museum of Modern Art, New York. Katherine S. Dreier Bequest, 51; Gino Severini, Dynamic Hieroglyphic of the Bal Tabarin, 1912. Collection, The Museum of Modern Art, New York. Acquired through the Lillie P. Bliss Bequest, 51; X. Lambours, Viva, 145; H. Gloaguen, Viva, 145; X. Lambours, Viva, 148; F. Hers, Viva, 148; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 148; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 149; H. Gloaguen, Viva, 149; P. Guis, Rapho, 166; R. Doisneau, Rapho, 166; Arnaud Legrain, Viva, 166; M. Delluc, Viva, 167; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 167; P. Michaud, Rapho, 167; Air France, 191; J. P. Verney, Ministère de I'Agriculture, 191; P. Bringe, Ministère de l'Agriculture, 191; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 191; Chambre de Métiers de la Meuse, 191; R. Doisneau, Rapho, 191; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 200; Prospectus de Sculpture bumaine, 210; Tennis-magazine/Sygma, 210; M. Delluc, Viva, 242; Esalas Baitel, Viva, 242; A. Dagberr, Viva, 242; D. de Saint-Sauveur, Le Figaro-Magazine, 268; Documentation Séminarc, 307; R. Doisneau, Rapho, 313; Maison et Jardin, 313; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 373; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 377; Y. Jeanmougin, Viva, 377; La Republique des Pyrenees, 383; Y. Jeanmougin, Viva, 385; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 385; C. Raimond-Dityvon, Viva, 455.

## index

Academic marker, 13, 23, 88, 91, 93, 96

Acquisition of cultural competence, 2-3, 6566, 68, 7172, 80, 85, 95

Adorno, T. W., 386

Aesthetic, 4450, 485488; popular aesthetic, 4-5, 3234, 41; pure aesthetic, S; dominated aesthetic, 41; anti-Kantian, 41-42

Aesthetic choices, and ethics, 283; 286-287

Aesthetic disposition, 2830, 50, 53-56, 263; and photography, 35, 39-40, 42; and cultural capital, 39

Aesthetic distancing, 34-35, 39-40

Aesthetic-in-itself, 4, 67

Aestheticism, 5, 44, 47, 58; revolutionary, 48

Age, 16, 106; generational conflicts, 1, 296; and cinema-going, 26; bourgeois adolescents, 55; and income, 104; and educational capitai, 104-105; social ageing, 110111; and sports, 212, 219; and political ideology, 353354

Alienation, 446; and being-for-others, 207; and body image, 207

Allodoxia, 142, 155, 164, 323, 326, 327, 428, 459

Althusser, Louis, 228

Analogy, 53; to male/female differences, 382-383

Analysis of essence, 72

Anti-intellectualism, 93, 293

Appearances, 253254

Appropriation of cultural products, 23, 227-228, 230, 267, 269270, 280281; material or symbolic, 228, 282-283; struggles over, 249-250; quality of goods, 281282

Appropriation of economic goods, 249-250

Aristocracy, 24, 70, 281

Aristotle, 258, 489

Art, 7, 80, 176, 254

Art dealers, 122

Art galleries, 273

Art museum, 30, 272273

Art of living, 47-48, 57, 254, 310, 370-371

Artifice, 491

Artists, 3, 62, 176, 228, 239, 267, 295; appropriation of cultural goods, 282; and patrons of art, 316317

Asceticism, 214, 219, 256, 269, 287, 317

Associations, 546-547, 552-553,556-559

Attributive judgemenr, 52, 473, 475476, 479, 556, 558

Authenticity, 74

Autodidacticism, 24, 67, 84-85, 147, 328-329

Autonomy: of production, 3, 226; of form, 30, 49; of art works, 228

Avant-garde culture, 1, 239, 294

Avant-garde theatre, 19, 234235, 239

Bakhtin, Mikhail, 491

Bally, Charles, 95, 472

Barbarous taste, and pure taste, 3032, 4344, 178

Barthes, Roland, 76

Beauty care. See Health and beauty care

Being and seeming, 252

Body image, 191-193, 380; and foods, 190; and social space, 206-208; alienated body, 207; body-for-others, 207

Body language, 177

Borges, Jorge Luis, 258

Bourgeois, 12, 19, 28, 62, 75, 91, 176, 265; and dominated aesthetic, 41; shocking the bourgeois, 4748; semi-

Bourgeois (Cont.) bourgeois, 150; and survey data, 174; meals, 196, 199; entertaining, 197; clothing, 201-202; taste, 292294; fertilicy strategies, 333. See also Perice bour geoisie

Bridge game, 217

Bureaucracies, 370

Cafés, 183

Casualness, 256

Charisma, 31, 208, 390

Charm, 208

Chess game, 217

Child-rearing, 368-369

Cinema, 2628, 32, 63, 271272; ethics and aesthetics, 4546

Circus, 34

Civilization, 74

Class habitus. See Habitus

Class solidarity, 381, 384, 390, 394

Class struggle, 48, 113, 165, 245246, 249251, 254, 315-317, 451

Classical raste, 65

Classification, 466467, 471473, 477-478; and struggles, 479481

Clerical workers, 122; ethics and aestherics, 46; and food, 180

Clothing, 187; working class use of, 200201; bourgeois use of, 201-202; and gender, 201-202; and counterculture, 233

Clubs, 162-163

Commercial employers, 115-116, 120, 122, 124, 263, 266-267; spending by, 184; clothing of, 202; and sports, 219; life-style, 305; newspaper reading by, 450

Commercial entrepreneurs, 123, 137

Common-sense knowledge, 22, 33, 101

Competence, 2, 13, 23, 50, 52, 63, 6566, 86, 96, 263, 281

Comperirion: in sports, 214; over cultural goods, 230231

Condescension straregies, 472473

Conditions of existence, 53-54, 56; classes of, 101, 114; and habitus, 170, 172; and taste, 178; adapration t, 246

Conformity, 331, 381382

Connoisseurs, 66, 279280

Conspicuous consumption, 31, 55

Consultancy, 152153

Consumption of cultural goods, 12,

67, 13, 100, 280; and social spaces, 176; and production, 230, 232; manner of, 282

Correspondence analysis, 260261, 342 Cosmetics. See Health and beauty care

Counter-culture, 144, 251; and sports, 220; and clothing, 233

Craftsmen, 122, 135, 137, 141, 345-346; ethics and aesthetics, 46; newspaper reading by, 448

Credit, 163-164

Critics, 234-235, 239-240

Cultivated disposition, 13, 24

Cultural capital, 12, 53-54, 70, 114115, 261, 264; and cinema-going, 27; and aesthetic disposition, 39; and educational capital, 13-14, 18, 80-83, 133; and hierarchy of classes, 116, 120; and sports, 220; and economic capital, 303

Cultural comperence. See Competence

Cultural nobility, 2

Culture, 1, 74, 99, 250; extra-curricular, 1, 2425, 63, 65; general, 2325; democratization of, 228. See also Legicimate culture

Dannenmaier, W. D., 208

Delegation, 72

Democratization: of schooling, 143-144; of culture, 228

Derrida, Jacques, 494495

Derachment, 4, 6

Diachronic properties of positions, 345, 346, 350, 453, 454

Diplomas, 25

Discriminatory selection, 162

Disenchantment, 144, 146

Disinterestedness, 4, 41, 5556, 254, 282; in production of culural producrs, 240

Dispossession, 386-387, 390; and political opinion, 428

Discancing, 3435, 39-40, 5455, 256, 394

Doctes, 69, 73-74

Domestic servants, 46, 184

Dominant class, 23-24, 57, 68-69, 114, 123, 258, 266; generational conficts in, 1; taste in, 16; ethics and aestherics, 46; interior decoration, 78-79; organisation of, 116; degree of closure,

120, 132; supply and demand in, 232; and symbolic struggles, 254; class fraction, 260; appropriation of cultural products, 270, 282; and producers of cultural goods, 316-317; ferrility strategies, 333; and working classes, 382383; newspaper reading by, 449-450

Dominated aesthetics, 41

Domination, 386, 387, 395, 396

Doxa, 471

Drama. See Thearre

Duby, Georges, 470, 477

Dumézil, Georges, 470

Durkheim, Emile, 72, 80, 471

Ease, 55, 71, 176, 255256, 339

Economic capital, 114115, 263-264; and hierarchy of classes, 116, 120; and taste, 177-178; and educational capital, 287, 291; and cultural capiral, 303

Economic necessity, 54-56, 177; taste for, 374-376, 378-380

Economic power, 55, 56

Economy of practices, 224

Educational capital, 12, 53, 63, 92; and cultural capital, 13-14, 18, 80-83; and competence, 23; and gratuitous knowledge, 26; and cinema-going, 2628; and occupation, 103-104, 296297, 301, 303-304, 310, 315, 390; and age, 104-105; and gender, 105; and social origin, 105; and teproduction strategies, 137, 147, 150; and economic capital, 287, 291; and politics, 407-410

Educational function of arr, 49-50, 74

Educational system, 13, 23-26, 67; investmenr in, 120, 122; hierarchy within, 122; and mobile classes, 132-133; and cultural capical, 133; devaluing of academic qualifications, 133-135, 142-143, 147, 150; democratization of schooling, 143-144; changes in, 154-156; uses of, 157, 160; and aurodidacts, 328329; and dispossession, 387, 390; opinions concerning, 411

Elective affinities, 241

Elias, Norbert, 73, 227

Empiricism, 245

Engels, J. F., 177, 397

Engineers, 116, 124, 135, 265; clothing of, 202; ascetic disposition of, 287;

generational conficts, 296; newspaper reading by, 448

Enjoyment, 490495

'Enlightened elitism,' 252

Enterraining, 197

Eternity, 72

Ethics, and aesthetics, 4450, 283, 286-287, 370-371

Executives, 116, 120, 122, 124, 137, 265, 267, 351; ethics and aesthetics, 46; food purchases by, 185; clothing of, 202; and sports, 219; ascetic disposition of, 287; generational conflicts, 296; life-style of, 305; newspaper reading by, 448, 450

Expectations of audiences, 239-240

Experience, 68, 7476; lived experience, 100

Extra-curricular culture, 1, 24-25, 63; and social origin, 65

Fair play, 215

Family heirlooms. See Inheritance

Farm laborers and farmers, 114, 124, 135, 137

Fashion, 378

Females. See Gender

Femininity, 191-192

Fertility strategies, 331-332, 337-338

Ferishism, 250

Flaubert, Gustave, 254

Flying, 218

Folk dancing, 58

Foods, 79, 177; atritudes towards eating and drinking, 179-180, 183; expenditures on, 184-185, 187, 190, 199-200; gender and eating habits, 185187, 190-192, 195; and body image, 190; working-class meals, 194-195, 197; bourgeois meals, 196, 199

Form and substance, 253

Formalism, 3334; bourgeois, 196-197, 199, 201; in sports, 220

Francastel, Pierre, 68

Freedom, 24, 254255; working-class, 194195, 197, 201; in sports, 220 Frivolicy, 74

Furnishings, 7779

Future social ascension, 346

Future, planning for, 180, 183

Games of culture, 12, 54, 250251, 330

Gastronomy, 68

Gautier, Jean-Jacques, 240

Gender, 107-108; and photogenic object judgements, 39-40; and music recognition, 63: and educational capital, 105; and occupation, 108; and devaluing of academic qualifications, 133-134; and eating habits, 185187, 190-192, 195; and clothing, 201-202; analogy to male/female diff erences, 382-383; and personal opinion, 402-405; and politics, 406407, 410

General culture, 2325

Genet, Jean, 33

Geographicai space, and social distance, 124

Gide, André, 415

Gombrich, E. H., 50, 227

Goodwill, cultural, 321, 323; of petite bourgeoisie, 352

Gramsci, Antonio, 386

Gratuitous knowledge, and educational capital, 26

Greco, Pierre, 463

Habitus, 101-102, 109, 114, 142, 170, 260, 372374, 466-467; production of, 123; and conditions of existence, 170, 172; and life-styles, 172-173; and political opinions, 437-440

Halbwachs, Maurice, 250

Health and beauty care, 179180, 184, 202, 378, and foods, 190; of petite bourgeoisie, 206; of working classes, 206

Hedonism, 180, 183, 394; and sports, 219

Hegel, G. W. F., 488

Hierarchies of legitimacy, 8688, 93

High-society market, 8889

History of art, 4

Homology: between social spaces, 175, 208; in production/consumption, 232233, 241

Hosting occupations, 152

Humane and humanitarian tasks and feelings, 40

Idealization, 58

Income. See Economic capital

Industrialists, 115116, 120, 122, 124, 135, 137, 263, 266267; spending by, 184; clothing of, 202; life-style of, 305; newspaper reading by, 448, 450

Inheritance, 19, 7678, 80-83, 265; and social class trajectories, 110

Intellectual taste, 292294

Intellectuals, 12, 62, 176, 228, 239; right-wing and left-wing, 12, 292293; appropriation of cultural products, 270, 282; and patrons of art, 316-317; art of living, 370-371; and working-class condition, 372374

Intention, 3; of observer, 30; aesthetic, 47; artistic, 52

Interior decoration, 7779

Intolerance, 5657

Intuitionism, 20

Investment sense, 85-88, 142, 249

Kant, Immanuel, 5, 42, 74, 466, 486-490, 492-494, 498; Kantian and anti-Kantian aesthetic, 5, 41-42

Kantarovitch, H., 72

Kitsch, 62, 282

Knowledge, 68, 7476, 470; gratuitous, 26; of culture, 318319, 330; and autodidacts, 329

Labour market, 224-225. See also Occupations

Langer, Suzanne, 31

Language, 176-177, 194, 226-227, 331, 476; linguistic ease, 255; political, 459-465

Larbaud, Valéry, 228

Legitimate culture, 26, 28

Leibniz, G. W. von, 466

Leisure activities, 179180

Libraries, 273

Life-style, 101, 124, 170, 193, 208, 258, 283; and habitus, 172-173; and taste, 173175; indicators of, 263; of new bourgeoisie, 304-305, 309-311, 314-315

Linear thinking, 107, 126

Literary quotation, 73

Lived experience, 100

Love, 243-244

Lower middie class, 4447

Luxury goods and activities, 55, 278-282, 287

Males. See Gender

Manners, 66, 6872, 91, 95

Manual workers: ethics and aesthetics, 46; and food, 180; clothing of, 201; fertility strategies of, 333

Marital status, and social class, 108109

Markets, 65, 8586, 9596, 113; academic and non-academic, 13, 23, 88, 91, 93, 96; high-society, 8889; toy market, 223224; labour market, 224-225

Married couples, homogeneity of, 241, 243

Marx, Karl, 178179, 251, 280, 397, 467

Mass production, 386

Materialism, 394

Medical and social services, 123

Melodrama, 34

Méré, Chevalier de, 70

Meritocracy, 291, 303

Michelat, G., 439

Middle class, 111112, 122-123; taste of, 16; and popular aesthetic, 32; and significance of objects, 43; ethics and aesthetics, 4447

Middle-brow culture, 323, 325, 327

Middle-brow taste, 16, 58, 60, 267

Misappropriation, 431

Mondains, 69-70, 73-74

Morality: of petite bourgeoisie, 352-353, 367369; and demoralization, 384; and politics, 432437

Museums, 30, 272273

Music, 16, 1819; knowledge of composers, 13-14, 63, 89; inner music, 19; songs and singers, 6061, 83; playing of musical instrument, 7576; concert-going, 272273

Naivety, 5, 62

Natural feelings, 40

Natural taste, 67, 68, 74

Newcomers, 19

Newspaper reading, 21, 234, 417; and political opinions, 440444, 446451

Nietzsche, F. W., 177, 252, 414

Noblesse oblige, 24

Nostalgia, 58

Objectification, 12, 85, 100, 208, 227, 239

Objectified philosophy, 496497

Objective class, 101

Objectivism, 244

Occupations, 106; and educational capital, 103104, 296297, 301, 303304, 310, 315, 390; and gender, 108; stability of groups, 137, 141; changing nature of, 150152; representational, 152

Office workers, 104, 114, 135, 345, 351;

food purchases by, 180, 185; clothing of, 201; fertility strategies of, 332333; newspaper reading by, 447-448

Opera, 272

Opinion. Sæ Personal opinion; Questionnaires

Ortega y Gasser, José, 4, 31-32

Painting, 14, 16, 20, 75, 269

Panofsky, Erwin, 2, 2930

Patrons of art, 316317

Peer-group pressure, 26

Personal opinion, 398402, 405, 411, 414417; and gender, 402405; production of, 417-426

Personality, 281

Petite bourgeoisie, 14, 40, 48, 5758, 79, 91, 123, 365; declining, 61, 265266, 346, 350-351; new, 61, 265266, 354, 357363, 365369, 553; pretensions of, 62, 294, 362; health and beauty care, 206; life-style of new bourgeoisie, 304305, 309311, 314315; reverence for culture, 321, 323; and middle-brow culture, 326-327; seriousness of, 330-331; fertility strategies of, 331, 337-338; upward mobility of, 333, 337338; taste of, 339, 341-343; executant, 351354; and personal opinion, 415416

Philosophy, 496497

Photography, 32, 58; and aesthetic disposition, 35, 39-40, 42; ethics and aesthetics, 4447

Physical properties, 384; occupational profit from, 152153

Piaget, Jean, 80

Pirandello, Luigi, 33

Place of residence, 105, 116

Pleasure, 367-368, 490-495, 498499

Political space, 451, 453

Politics, 48, 109, 291, 397398, 411, 414; and social class, 111, 427-428, 440; and age, 353354; interest or indifference towards, 405407; and gender, 406407, 410; and educational capital, 407-410; and dispossession, 428; and morality, 432437; and habitus, 437-440; and newspapers, 440-444, 446451; trajectory effect, 453459; and language, 459465

Poppet, Karl, 228

Popular aestheric, 32

Popular taste, 16

Popularization, 323, 326

Populism, 374

Pornocracy, 48

Positivism, 20, 94

Practical perceptions, 29

Precocity, 70

Preferences, 13, 19, 261

Presentation, 184, 202, 206; and sports, 214

Pretension, 14, 30, 62, 251253, 294, 381382; of petite bourgeoisie, 62, 294, 362

Production of cultural goods, 12, 20, 231; and consumption, 230, 232; and taste, 231, 241; and social class, 233234; and audience expectations, 239240; servility in, 240; sincerity in, 240; and dominant class, 316- 317

Profane and sacred, 6-7, 19

Professionals, 102103, 114, 122, 264, 266267; spending by, 184; food purchases by, 185, 190; and sports, 219; generational conflicrs, 296; newspaper reading by, 448

Profundity, 74

Programme of cultivation, 67

Proselytism, 228, 370

Proudhon, P. J., 48-49, 251

Proust, Marcel, 21, 53, 97, 173, 485, 498-499

Psychoanalysis, 367, 369

Pure gaze, 3-4

Pure taste, 486488; and barbarous taste, 30-32, 43-44, 178

Purity, 176, 254

Questionnaires, 95, 194; and personal opinions, 399402, 405; methodology of, 503-518

Rapaport, Antol, 259

Reading matter, 116. See also Newspaper reading

Reality of representation, 482484

Recognition, 319

Reconversion strategies, 125, 131, 133, 135, 137, 147, 150, 157

References, 5253

Religious opinions, and social class, 111

Representation, 4344, 72, 184, 253; of reality, 482-484

Representational occupations, 152

Revolutionary aestheticism, 48

Right to speak, 411-414

Rivière, Jacques, 173

Sacred and profane, 6, 7, 19

Sartre, Jean-Paul, 207, 243

Saussure, F. de, 247

Scholastic culture, 23, 65, 6870, 73

Scholem, Gershom, 85

Schopenhauer, Arthur, 487

Sculpture, 75

Selection, 162

Self-control, 40

Self-employed sector, 264

Self.esteem, 25, 142

Self-image, 25

Seniority, 70

Seriousness, 5, 54, 57, 74, 330331

Servants, domestic, 46, 184

Servility, in production of cultural products, 240

Sex. See Gender

Sexuality, 367368

Shopkeepers, 123, 135, 137, 141, 345346; ethics and aesthetics, 46; newspaper reading by, 448

Significance, 22

'Significantness,' 22

Simon, M., 439

Sincerity, 43; in production of cultural products, 240

Skilled and semi-skilled workers, 114-115

Social age, 233

Social capital, 114

Social change, 156

Social class, 103104, 106108; and

147, 264-265; and religious opinions,

111; and political opinions, 111,

163-164; and sports, 214215,

217-220; and production of cultural goods, 233-234. See also Habitus

Social compatibilities and incompatibil. ities, 241, 243

Social conditioning, 101

Social mobility, 131-133

Social origin, 1, 1213, 63, 75, 7778, 92, 265-266; and extra-curricular culture, 65; and educational capital, 105

Social science, 467468

Social space, 169, 266, 343-345, 473; in ternalization of, 175; homology be-(ween spaces, 175, 208; and cultural consumption, 176; and body image, 206-208; and theatre, 234; as objective space, 244245

Social structures, 467471

Social uses, 18, 20-21, 49; and aestheric judgements, 4243

Social value, 21

Socialization, 474475

Soul, 254

Spectacles, 34, 58

Spinoza, Baruch, 228

Spirituality, 19, 317

Sports, 20, 93, 209; functions of, 211-212; and competition, 214; team and individual, 214215, 217; and fair play, 215; and social class, 215, 217220; and cultural capital, 220; freedom and formalism, 220

'Stand-in,' 24

Statistical analysis, 22, 40, 94, 103, 557; statistical data, 525-545

Stratification, 245

Stylistic characterizations, 50, 52

Srylization of life, 55, 57, 174, 176, 376

Subjectivism, 244

Substantialism, 22

Substitution industry, 365

Superficiality, 74

Supply and demand, 230-232, 241

Supply side, 223

Survey data, 174, 245246, 258; methodology, 503518; complementary sources, 519-524

Symbolic capital, 291

Symbolization, 72

Synchronic properties of positions, 345, 453

Tabard, Nicole, 178

Taste, 1, 7, 99, 174175, 247, 466, 474; and social class, 2, 6; popular taste, 16; legitimate, 16, 56-57, 71; middlebrow, 16, 58, 60, 267; barbarous and pure tastes, 3032, 4344, 178; and distaste, 56-57; classical, 65; and lifestyles, 173-175; and economic capial, 177-178; and conditions of existence, 178; and production of cultural goods, 231, 241; bourgeois taste, 292294; intellectual taste, 292294; petit-bourgeois taste, 339, 341343; for necessity, 374376, 378380; pure taste, 486-488; of refiection, 489491; of sense, 489491

Taste-maker, 91, 255

Teachers, 115-116, 120, 122-123, 135, 264265, 267; ethics and aesthetics, 46; spending by, 184; food purchases by, 185; clothing of, 202; and sports, 219; appropriation of cultural products, 272273; ascetic disposition of, 287; newspaper reading by, 448

Technical objects, 29

Technicians, 83-84, 122, 304; ethics and aesthetics, 46; middle-brow taste of, 58; newspaper reading by, 447

Television, 33

Theatre, 19, 32, 116, 120, 269; and social space, 234; boulevard and experimental, 19, 234235, 239

Theorists, 245

Thumin, F. J., 208

Time, 71-72, 281282

Titles, 2226, 161

Toy market, 223, 224

Travelling space, 169

Trickle-down effect, 232

Ubiquity, 72

Unskilled workers, 114

Utopia, 397

Value of culture, 250

Values, 247

Virility, 192, 384; and foods, 190192

Visible and invisible, in clothing expenditures, 201

Wealth, indicators of, 116, 127. See also Economic capital

Weber, Max, 55, 174

Woolf, Virginia, 35, 444

Working classes, 57, 114; taste in, 16; and popular aesthetic, 32-33; and dominated aesthetic, 41; and signifcance of objects, 43; ethics and aesthetics, 44-47; and educational system, 143144; meals, 190, 194-195, 197; entertaining by, 197; clothing of, 200-201; health and beauty care, 206; fertility strategies of 332; and intellectuals, 372374; and dominant class, 382-383; newspaper reading by, 447

'Working wives,' 178

Yeats, William Butler, 227

Distinction is at once a vast ethnography of contemporary France and a dissection of the bourgeois mind. Bourdieu's subject is the study of culture, and his objective is most ambitious: to provide an answer to the problems raised by Kant's Critique of Judgment by showing why no judgment of taste is innocent.

A complex, rich, intelligent book. It will provide the historian of the fiuture with priceless materials and it will bring an essential contribution to sociological theory." — Fernand Braudel

"One of the more distinguished contributions to social theory and research in recent years . . . There is in this book an account of culture, and a methodology of its study, rich in implication for a diversity of felds of social research. The work in some ways redefines the whole scope of cultural studies."

— Anthony Giddens, Partisan Review

A book of extraordinary intelligence.

— Irving Louis Horowitz, Commonweal

Bourdieu's analysis transcends the usual analysis of conspicuous consumption in two ways: by showing that specific judgments and choices matter less than an esthetic outlook in general and by showing, moreover, that the acquisition of an esthetic outlook not only advertises upper-class prestige but helps to keep the lower orders in line. In other words, the esthetic world view serves as an instrument of domination. It serves the interests not merely of status but of power. It does this, according to Bourdieu, by emphasizing individuality, rivalry, and 'distinction' and by devaluing the well-being of society as a whole." — Christopher Lasch, Vogue

Pierre Bourdieu was Professor of Sociology at the Collège de France, Paris.

Harvard University Press Cambridge, Massachusetts

IS8N 0-674-21277-0
