> 来源：Art, Creativity, and the Potential of Artificial Intelligence (Mazzone, Marian Elgammal, Ahmed)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Art, Creativity, and the Potential of Artificial Intelligence (Mazzone, Marian Elgammal, Ahmed)\Art, Creativity, and the Potential of Artificial Intelligence (Mazzone, Marian Elgammal, Ahmed).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 4. AI Art: Blurring the Lines between the Artist and the Tool

Many artists and art historians resist seeing work created with AI as art because their definition of art is based on the modern artist figure as the sole locus of art creation and creativity. Therefore, the figure of the artist is necessary to their definition of art. But understanding art as a vehicle for the personal expression of the individual artist is a relatively recent and culturally-specific conception. For many centuries, across many cultures and belief systems, art has been made for a variety of reasons under a wide range of conditions. More often created by groups of people rather than an individual artist (think medieval cathedrals or guild workshops), art is often made to the specifications of patrons and donors large and small, made to order, funded by a wide variety of groups, civic organizations, or religious institutions, and made to function in an extraordinary range of situations. The notion of a work of art being the coherent expression of the individual’s psyche, emotional condition, or expressive point of view begins in the Romantic era and became the prevailing norm in the 19th and 20th centuries in Western Europe and its colonies. Although this remains a common motivation for many artists working today, it does not mean it is the only and correct definition of art. And certainly, it is not a role that any AI system will ever be able to fulfill. Clearly, machine learning and AI cannot replicate the lived experience of a human being; therefore, AI is not able to create art in the same way that human artists do. Thankfully, we are not proposing that it can in our work. Humans and AI do not share all of the same sources of inspiration or intentions for art making. Why the machine makes art is intrinsically different; its motivation is that of being tasked with the problem of making art, and its intention is to fulfill that task. However, we are asking everyone to consider that a different process of creation does not disqualify the results of the process as a viable work of art. Instead consider that without the necessity of the individual expressive artist in our definition of art, how we conceptualize art and art making is greatly expanded.

AI is a set of algorithms designed to function as parallel to human intelligence actions such as decision-making, image recognition, language translation/comprehension, or creativity. Elsewhere in this issue of Arts, Hertzmann (Hertzmann 2018) makes a point about art algorithms being tools, not artists. As we have argued, we would agree that the algorithms in AI are not artists like human artists. But AI (art generating algorithm in this case) is more than a tool, like a brush with oil paint on it, which is an inanimate and unchanging object. Certainly, artists learn over time and with experience how to better use their tools, and their tools have a role in the physical actions by which they make work in paint. However, the paintbrush does not have the capacity to change, it does not make decisions based on past painting experiences, and it is not trained to learn from data. Algorithms contain all of those possibilities. Perhaps we can conceptualize AI algorithms as more than tools and closer to a medium. The word medium in the art world indicates far more than a tool, a medium includes not only the tools used (brush, oil paint, turpentine, canvas, etc.) but also the range of possibilities and limitations inherent to the conditions of creation in that area of art. Thus, the medium of painting also includes a history of painting styles, the physical and conceptual restraints of the 2-D surface, the limits of what can be recognized as a painting, a critical language that has been developed to describe and critique paintings, and so on. Admittedly, we are in the very early days of the medium of AI in art creation, but this medium might encompass tools such as code, mathematics, hardware and software, printing choices, etc., with medium conditions including algorithmic structuring, data collection and application, and the critical theory needed to detect and judge computational creativity and artistic intention within the much larger field of computer science. At this time, a problem is the relatively small number of people able to work creatively in this field or judge the role of the machine in the exercise of creative processes. This will change over time as artists, computer scientists, and historians/critics all become more knowledgeable. For human artists who are interested in the possibilities (and limitations) of AI in creativity and the arts, using AI as a creative partner is already happening now and will happen in the future. In a partnership, both halves bring skill sets to the process of creation. As Hertzmann notes in his article and Cohen discovered in his work with the AARON program, human artists bring capacity for high-quality work, artistic intent, creativity, and growth/change over time. Art is a social interaction. Actually, we think we can argue that AI does a fair amount of this, and it can certainly all be accomplished in a creative partnership between and artist and his or her AI system.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.M. and A.E.; methodology A.E. and M.M.; data curation A.E.; software A.E.; validation A.E.; writing—original draft preparation M.M. (abstract, introduction, Sections 3 and 4) and A.E. (Sections 1 and 2); writing—reviewing and editing, M.M.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## References

Agüera y Arcas, Blaise. 2017. Art in the Age of Machine Intelligence. Arts 6: 18. [CrossRef]

Benjamin, Walter. 1969. The Work of Art in Age of Mechanical Reproduction. In Illuminations. Edited by Hannah Arendt. New York: Schocken, pp. 217–51. First published 1936.

Berlyne, Daniel E. 1971. Aesthetics and Psychobiology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts of Meredith Corporation, p. 336.

Elgammal, Ahmed, Bingchen Liu, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Marian Mazzone. 2017. CAN: Creative adversarial networks, generating “art” by learning about styles and deviating from style norms. arXiv, arXiv:1706.07068.

Goodfellow, Ian, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 2672–80.

Hertzmann, Aaron. 2018. Can Computers Create Art? Arts 7: 18. [CrossRef]

Lewitt, Sol. 1967. Paragraphs on conceptual Art. Artforum 5: 79–84.

Martindale, Colin. 1990. The Clockwork Muse: The Predictability of Artistic Change. New York: Basic Books.

Schneider, Tim, and Naomi Rea. 2018. Has artificial intelligence given us the next great art movement? Experts say slow down, the ‘field is in its infancy. Artnetnews. September 25. Available online: https://news.artnet. com/art-world/ai-art-comes-to-market-is-it-worth-the-hype-1352011 (accessed on 3 February 2019).

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
