> 来源：Protocol analysis verbal reports as data (Ericsson, K. Anders (Karl Anders), 1947- etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Protocol analysis verbal reports as data (Ericsson, K. Anders (Karl Anders), 1947- etc.)\Protocol analysis verbal reports as data (Ericsson, K. Anders (Karl Anders), 1947- etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 22 Protocol Analysis

(2) Directed probe 2 Quesn: Did you use any sbgols? If so, whch? Answer: Yes, I used X.

(3) Undirected probe Verbal report: I was first trying to gct X and . when I attained X..

The replics in all three cases provide cvidence that the subject used X as a subgoal, yct thc cvidence is stronger in the third casc than in the sccond, and in the sccond than in the first. The vcrbalization in the first casc could casily bc gcneratcd by proccsses indepcndent of any memory for the actual thought processes. Comparing the sccond and third cases, the former communicatcs to subjccts what in formation the cxperimenter expects them to report. It may cncouragc subjccts to try to infer or gucss what particular in formation the cxpcrimenter will accept, and to generate information accordingly.

In many cases, othcr criteria are availablc for cstimating the validity of the rcports. An analysis of the task (Ncwcll & Simon, 1972) will often provide strong indications of the adequacy of vcrbalizcd information, especially in cascs with many logical possibilities for response.

Finally, different kinds of probes may have different effects upon the bchavior of subjccts. Requesting a ccrtain kind of information may suggest to subjects what aspects of the task are important. Subjects may also altcr thcir normal ways of processing so as to be able to give the requested information to the expcrinicnter on subscqucnt trials.

In studics that usc retrospective verbalization, subjects are scldom asked what they can remember about specific instances of thcir cognitive processcs. Rather, they are usually askcd to rctrospect about their thought processes in experimcnts with many trials or to answer general qucstions, and thus must try to synthcsizc all the available information after sclcctive recall. In making judgments, subjects havc access to an cxtrcmcly large base of relevant knowledge. Tversky and Kahneman (1973) have demonstratcd that subjects only rctrieve a few events or picccs of knowledgc and usc this sample to infer frequencics and probabilitics of events. Although the retrieved samplc may often be representative and the inferrcd probability judgment fairly accurate, there arc many factors influencing retricvability that do not reflect frequency. Hence, in many situations such cognitive processes will yield incorrcct judgments about frequency. Even though all the spccific information retrieved is accurate, the inferrd probability may be seriously in error. Nisbctt and Ross (1980) have given a rccent comprehensive discussion of such biasing factors in human judgment.

## Particular and General Reports

If the purpose of retrospective probing were to recover memory traces of subjects' proccsses, the appropriate instruction would bc to ask them to recall their specific thought processes during particular trials of the experiment. For at least two different reasons, such a procedure is rarely F    tal l nitive processes will bc poor and lacking in dctail. Moreover, there is a tendency for recurrent cognitive processes gradually to become automatic, so that fewer or nonc of thc intermediatc statcs of the processes for the later trials of the experiment are accessible for recall.

Sccond, many experimenters, because thcy are intcrested in general characteristics of the thought processes and not in the cpisodic details of the individual trials, probc thcir subjccts with questions of the type, "How did you do thesc tasks?" Such qucstions implicitly or explicitly request a general rather than spccific interpretation of how the subjects were performing the tasks.

There arc sevcral different ways in which subjects might arrive at descriptions of their general procedurcs, as distinct from rcports on spccific behaviors during individual trials. Onc possibility is that subjects are aware of the general procedures, or "programs," thcy arc using, use essentially thc same programs on all trials, and can recall and report these directly without referencc to the specific behavior thcy produced. Another possibility is that subjects rcmcmber some parts of their processes during particular trials, and generalizc this information into a general procedure, which they then report. A different possibility is that subjects remember some spccific tasks, regeneratc-by redoing them—the processes uscd for these tasks, and usc this information to infer the general procedures thcy may havc uscd. Finally, subjects may draw upon various kinds of prior information, such as gcncral knowledge on how one ought to do thesc tasks, to gencrate a verbal rcport describing a gencral procedure or strategy. In this casc, the verbal reports may not bear any closc relation to the actual cognitive processes (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977).

In areas of applicd psychological rescarch where verbal questioning has a long tradition, subjccts arc usually askcd about spccific events rather than for gcncral information or conclusions. In the critical incident technique proposcd by Flanagan (1954), the subjects wcre always asked to report their memory for spccific events. For example:

pilots returning from combat were asked "to think of some occasion during combat flying in which you personally experienccd feclings of acutc disoricntation or strong veitigo." Ihey were thcn askcd to describe what they "saw, heard, or felt that brought on the experience." (Flanagan, 1954, p. 329)

Interpretive probing, unlike the critical incident tcchnique, cannot be rclicd upon to produce data stemming directly from the subjects' actual scqucnces of thought processes. Thc probing proccdures cncourage or even require subjects to spcculatc and theorize about their processes, rather than leaving the thcory-building part of the cnterprise to the cxperimenter. Therc is no reason to supposc that the subjects themsclves will or can be awarc of the limitations of the data thcy are providing. Moreover, the varicty of inference and mcmory processes that might be involved in producing the rcports make thcm cxtremely difficult to intcrpret or to use as behavioral data.

## TWO CHALLENGES TO VERBAL REPORTS

It will be useful, in order to get a perspcctive on the issues, to use the abovc analysis to examinc two published papers that have somctimes been interpreted as providing strong cvidence against trusting verbal reports as data from which cognitive proccsses can bc infcrred: the first, a papcr rcporting a study by Vcrplanck and Oskamp; the second, the revicw paper on rctrospective vcrbal rcports by Nisbett and Wilson. A discussion of thesc papers will show how the information proccssing model we havc outlincd can hclp us interpret the findings of cxperiments on verbalization.

## Apparent Inadequacics of Concurrent Verbalization

In an often cited study (Vcrplanck, 1962), Verplanck and Oskamp claimcd to have shown that vcrbalized rules are dissociated from the bchavior they werc supposed to control. By having subjects verbalize the rules thcy were following in sorting illustrated cards, the cxperimenters could rcinforce either the verbal rule or the placement of cards (i.e., bchavior). To make the contingencies less noticcable, the criterion trials wcre followed by additional trials with partial rcinforcement. When correct placements were reinforced, the subjects were found to place cards correctly in7.8% of the trials; but they stated a correct or corre lated rule in only 48.4% of the trials. When correct statement of the rule was rcinforced, the subjects stated a correct or correlated rule on 92.8% of the trials, but placed the cards correctly on only 76.8% of the trials.

In a replication and analysis of this experiment, Dulany and O'Connell (1963) werc able to show that the above results could be attributed to two artifacts of the original experiment. First, in the case where correct placement was rcinforccd, by making a correction for guessing (the subjects had a 50-50 chancc of placing thc card in the correct pile when they didn't know the rulc), wc can estimate that subjc knew te corret answer i 3.6%  the trials- perentag v close to the 48.4% in which they stated the correct rule.

Second, with respect to the reinforcement of rules, Dulany and O'Connell found that the rules defined by Verplanck and Oskamp were ambiguous for thc card illustrations thcy cmploycd. In fact, naive subjects who wcre told thesc rules explicitly misplaccd the cards as frequently as did the subjects in the original cxperiment.

In a detailed analysis of the rules the subjects verbalized on each trial, Dulany and O'Connell found that on all but 11 of 34,408 trials the subjects put the card where they said they werc going to. Hence, Dulany and O'Conncll impeachcd rather thoroughly the cvidence put forth by Verplanck and Oskamp for bclicving that the rulcs subjccts verbalized were inconsistent with thcir behaviors.

Numcrous studies provide positive support for consistcncy between verbalized rules, concepts, and hypothescs and immediately preceding and succecding behavior, bcfore subjects reccive feedback. When Schwartz. (1966) askcd subjccts their rcasons for placing a card as they did, the rcasons given were consistent with the placements on all but 2 of 1,962 trials. Even more impressive, Frankcl, Ievinc, and Karpf (1970) obtained retrospective reports from subjccts about the basis for thcir responses to four earlicr discrimination-lcarning problems with 30 nonfeedback trials cach, and found that subjects could providc such reports in more than 90% of the scquences of trials.

## Apparent Inadequacies of Retrospective Reports

In a recent extensive revicw of studics permitting evaluation of retrospective verbal reports, Nisbett and Wilson (1977) have reported evidence that appcars at first sight to be very damaging to the utility of verbal reports for inferring information processes. Since their paper has receivcd widespread attention, it is important that we review their findings carefully. The authors summarize thcir main cmpirical findings thus (1977, p. 233):

Pcople often cannot report accuratcly on the effects of particular stimuli on higher order, inference-based responses. Indccd, somctimes they cannot report on the existence of critical stimuli, somctimes cannot report on thc existence of their responses. and sometimes cannot cvcn report that an inferential process of any kind has occurred.

First, we call attention to the frequent usc, in thcir summary, of the qualificrs "oftcn" and "somctimes." "Nisbctt and Wilson cite a large number of cxperiments that support thcir conclusions, but do not investigate in dctail thc conditions under which thesc conclusions do and do not hold. Moreover, they do not proposc a definite model of the cognitiv processes as a framework forinterpreting the findings they survey. Their thcoretical interprctations arc cntirely informal, resting hcavily on an undefincd distinction bctwcen introspective acccss to "content" and to process," or, as they alternativcly statc it, (1977, p.255), between access to "private facts" and to "mental processes." Thcir summary of the kinds of information to which subjects do have access is this (1977, p. 255):

... we do indeed have direct access to a grcat storehouse of private knowlcdgc .. The individual knows a host of personal historical facts; hc knows thc focus of his attention at any given point of time; he knows what his current sensations arc and has what almost all psychologists and philosophers would assert to be "knowlcdge" at least quantitatively superior to that of obscrvers concerning his cmotions, evaluations, and plans. Given that the individual docs possess a grcat deal of accurate knowledge … it becomes less surprising that people would persist in bclieving that they havc, in addition, direct access to their own cognitivc processes. The only mystery is why people are so poor at tclling thc difference between private facts that can be known with ncar certainty and mental processes to which therce may be no access at all.

Nisbett and Wilson also observe that subjects "are often capable of describing intermediatce results of a scries of mental operations (1977, p.55) i.e, that thy hold i TM and can accs the symbols that ae inputs and outputs to such operations).

We may compare this list of "private facts" and intermediate results that, according to Nisbett and Wilson, are accessible to subjects with the kinds of information that our processing model would inply that sub-coul rrt.Theiiual ows, ty y h u, his current scnsations, his emotions, his evaluations, and his plans. He knows the intermediate results of his mental opcrations. But these are exactly the kinds of information that, according to our model, would be held in STM and bc available for verbal reports.

Unfortunately, the studies revicwcd by Nisbctt and Wilson provide little data on what information is hecded during the thought processes, and what information is accessible from STM and I.TM at the time of the verbal report. Nisbctt and Wilson find that thc subjccts, when asked questions aboul their cognitive processes, frequcntly do not base their answers on memory for specific events at all, but "theorize" about their processes (1977, p. 233).

When reporting on the effects of stimuli, pcople may not interrogate a mcmory of thc cognitivc processcs that operated on the stimuli; instcad, they may basc thcir reports on implicit, a priori thcorics about the causal connection betwcen stimulus and response.

In reviewing the studies cited by Nisbett and Wilson, we can profitably raise the question of why and when subjects do not consult their memorics of cognitive processes in answering questions about those processcs. It is casy to draw the crroneous conclusion that this independence of verbal answers to questions about cognitive processes from the actual course and results of those processcs implics a general lack of accessiblc memory for such processes, or cven an unawareness of the information while the process was actually going on. But this swceping conclusion appears not to be justified.

The accuracy of verbal reports depends on the procedures used to clicit thcm and the relation bctwcen thc rcquestcd information and the actual scquence of hecded information. Invalid rcports, like those discusscd and obtained by Nisbctt and Wilson, may be duc to lack of access to thoughts (thcir claim), inadequate proccdures for cliciting verbal reports, or requcsting information that could not bc providcd even if thoughts wcre accessible. In a subsequcnt chapter (Chapter 3) we will describc in some detail what information will be hccdcd and hence reportable. Although somc studics citcd by Nisbett and Wilson did probe for such information, we will focus herc on the deviations betwcen the verbal report procedures used in many of the studics cited by Nisbett and Wilson and the procedures that, according to our model, would elicit valid retrospective reports of cognitive processes.

First, many of the verbal reports thcy discuss could be generated without accessing memory of the corresponding cognitive processes. In some of these studics, thc qucstions presented to subjects contain considerable background information from which answcrs could be generated without consulting thcir memorics. With questions like. "I noticed that you took more shock than avcrage. Why do you suppose you did?" (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977, p. 237) It is not cven clcar to us, nor probably to the subjects, that mcmory for the cognitive process should be the information source for thc answer. If subjects can gencrate their answcrs without consulting thcir mcmorics (Nisbett and Wilson showed that control subjects could do cxactly that), thcy might often prefer this method to retrieving information from memory.

Second, several aspects of the verbal report procedures reviewed by Nisbett and Wilson made the rclcvant thoughts less accessible. In most of the studics revicwed, the timc lag betwcen task and probe was sufficiently great to make it unlikcly that the rclevant information remained in STM. In Chapter 3 we will review thc rather extensive literature from general cxperimental psychology showing that time and intervening thought activity between the cognitive process and its verbal report, as well as incentive to recall memorics of the cognitive process, lead to dramatic declines in the accuracy of the verbally reported information. A rccent chapter by Gcnest and Turk (1981) and a paper by Wright and Kricwall (1980) give refcrcnces showing that such considerations of accessibility are powerful determiners of the accuracy of verbal reports for cognitive processes in tasks likc thosc discussed by Nisbett and Wilson (1977).

A tendency to generate verbal reports without access to memories will be stronger, the less readily available the memory is. When the probe is not a good retrieval cue for the relevant aspects of the memory, the subject must attempt, through conscious processing, to recall sufficient information to give an appropriate answcr. Since retrieval from LTM, even if possible, requires considerable timc and cfort, subjects, unless explicitly instructed to providc a rclativcly complete recall, may be disinclined to do so, cspccially if other ways of producing a response are hm.  t suy y Wrih anp 9) poi inc  at or h plicitly motivated to retrieve memory for thoughts in a judgment task.

Finally, in some studies revicwed by Nisbett and Wilson, subjects were asked to report information that cannot be given cven with complete access to the thought proccsses (cf. why-questions regarding causes), and information that is far from a direct recall of memory of the cognitivc processes. Our model predicts that information can be recovered by probes only if the samc information would be accessed by undirected requests for concurrent or retrospective reports. For many of the studics in the Nisbctt-Wilson review, our model would predict failure to obtain from the probes verbal information about particular instances of processes. For example, in betwcen-subjcct designs, subjects obviously cannot answer from memory of thcir processes why they bchaved differently from subjects in another experimental condition-—the processes did not include such a comparison. Hence, this information can be derived, if at all, only by comparing the descriptions of the processes provided by different scts of subjccts in thc two conditions. In other studics the subjects were asked how thcy would have rcacted if the experimental conditions had been different in a spccificd respect. Such probing for hypothetical states can never tap subjects' memories for their cognitive processes, since the information was ncver in memory. In still other studics, subjects wcrc asked, cxplicitly or implicitly, to summarize or generalizc the processes they uscd, rather than to report concretely the processes used on each trial.

Several articles have bcen published making similar criticisms of the Nisbctt and Wilson (1977) papcr, and raising other objections as well. Of particular interest are the papers discussing the problcms with verbal reports in betwcen-group designs. (Smith & Millcr, 1978). Some recent studies have shown that in corresponding within-group studics, subjects are ablc to providc vcridical verbal reports (Whitc, 1980; Weitz & Wright, 1979; Wright & Rip, 1980).

In sum, we disagree with Nisbctt and Wilson's interprctation that subjects simply were not aware of relevant information during the critical experiments. Instead, we claim that belter mcthods for probing for that awareness (concurrent or immediate retrospcctivc reports) would yield considcrable insight into the cognitivc proccsses occurring in most of the studics discussed by Nisbett and Wilson. On the other hand, we agree with Nisbett and Wilson's analysis of subjcct's rcports in situations where the subjects do not havc access to or for other reasons don't rely on mcmory for the cognitivc processes in qucstion. In such situations, Nisbett and Wilson proposc that an expcrimental subjcct infers the causes of his own behavior by relying on common-sense theorics and observable events-the same process that an observer would use to infer causes of bchavior in an observed subject. By using experimcntal situations, where common-sense theory would lead to the incorrect asscssment of causes, Nisbett and Wilson provide convincing cvidence for thcir interpretation by showing that both cxperimental subjccts and obscrvers agrcc on the incorrcct cause of the cxperimental subjects' bchaviors. (For a nice prcsentation and cxtension of thesc arguments sce Nisbett and Ross (1980).)

We think that Nisbett and Wilson's paper has becn uscful in forcing investigators like ourselves to think carefully about the rclation of verbal reports to cognitive processes. Many verbal report procedures are justly faulted by their review. Howcver, thcir results arc consistcnt with our model of concurrent and immediate rctrospective reports.

## Concluding Remarks

Our examination of two of thc most vigorous challenges to the usefulness of verbal reporting leaves intact our bclief that such reports— cspecially concurrent reports, and retrospcctivc reports of specific cognitive processes—provide powcrful mcans for gaining information about such processes. The concurrent report reveals the scquence of information heeded by the subject without altcring the cognitive process, while other kinds of verbal reports may change these processes. In retrospective reports of spccific processes, subjects generally will actually retricve the trace of the processes. In other forms of retrospective reporting, subjects, instead of rccalling this information, may report information that they have inferred or otherwise gencrated. Hence, in the chapters that follow, we will pay particular attcntion to the two spccial forms of reporting—the one concurrent, the other retrospcctive—that are most likcly to yicld direct evidencc of cognitive processes.

## VERBAL REPORTS OF COGNITIVE STATES AND STRUCTURES

Although this book focuses upon cognitive processes, the modcl and concepts it employs can be cxtended to the ron-cognitive aspects of verbal behaviors. There are several reasons for undertaking such an extension. It will permit us to identify common problems and issues in areas of psychology, like psychophysics, survey design, and measurement of personality traits, that traditionally have had little or no interaction wth cach other.In these areas, too, as in those wchave beendiscussing behaviorism has muted explicit cxamination of the status of verbal responses and reports.

First, we will propose a taxonomy of thesc other kinds of verbal reports, and will discuss briefly somc examples of rclevant rescarch. Then wc will consider two limited topics for more systematic discussion. The first of these is attitudc assessment, the sccond is the historical development of verbal reporting, with particular emphasis on introspection. All of the verbal reports with which we will be concerned in this section are clicited by probes specifying what information is to be reported. Often, also, a sct of alternatives is supplicd from which the subject has to sclect a response.

Predictions from our model about the effects of verbal reporting on thought processes will depend on the circumstances under which the verbalizations are induced. We can classify verbalizations according to the memories that are tapped and according to the verbalization instructions the experimenter gives to the subjects. With respect to the memory source of thc reported information, we can distinguish among (a) reports of stimuli that remain constant and available to the subjcct's senses while the report is being made, (b) reports of information rctained in STM, and (c) reports of information from I.IM. The ncxt threc subsections of this section will be devoted to the spccial problems that arise for each of these three kinds of reports.

## Reporting of Sensory Stimuli

At any given moment, a large amount of cxternal stimulation impinges on any human through the sensory reccptors (visual, auditory, etc.), as well as from internal visccral sourccs. Normally this information is not heedcd directly, but recognition processes access existing relevant I.TM patterns, which providc higher-level descriptions and arc in turn heeded. (In Chapter 3 we will discuss thcse recognition proccsscs and their relation to attention in some detail.) In many circumstances attention can be dircctcd toward the information in the scnsory stores (cf. Kahneman, 1973). We can focus on marks on the page wc are reading or listen for unusual faint sounds and so on. Many kinds of vcrbal reporting proccdures rely directly on our ability to process sensory information selectively.

In most psychophysical studies, subjects are instructcd as to the stimuli as well as the typcs of responses they will use. They are asked to rate how much pain the cxpcricncc causes, how loud a certain stimulus is, how far away a certain stimulus is, and so on. This rescarch has had a strong cmpirical emphasis and has becn virtually unaffected by the drastic changes in thcorctical vicws of mainstream experimental psychology. In our historical discussion, we will point to differcnces betwcen the psychophysical mcthods and the analytic introspcctivc methods, which also attempted to describe experiences in terms of the sensory units. Now we only want to sketch the relation of the psychophysical methods to our model of verbal reporting.

Since the primary goal of psychophysical rescarch has been to describe the structural relation betwcen physical stimulus and response, little attention has been paid to the mcdiating processes. However, selective attention is under attentional control and as reportable as is the final reponse. (The study citcd carlicr showing that subjects can substitute key pressing for verbal reports is a casc in point.)The rescarch mcthodology of psychophysics uses long sessions of trials to scek stable structural relations and highly automatized processes.

In a classic paper, Eriksen (1960) showed that the vcrbal report is the most sensitive index for basic perceptual processes, like discrimination. Hencc, the results from psychophysical mcthods of report are quite consistent with our modcl of verbal reporting. We would, however, likc to go a stcp further and argue that dctailing the cognitive processes involved in gencrating psychophysical reporis may prove quite useful. First, there is evidence that cognitive structures are involved cven in simple judgments, like discrimination. dramatic example is iven by Binct (1969), who showcd that the threshold for discriminating touch of two separate points of contact (comparcd to a single point of contact) could be rcduced 10 times by showing the subject the compass used. Second, different vcrbal instructions in judgments of size give different results (Carlson, 1977). Subjects give reliably different responses when asked to judge the objective sizc, the apparent sizc, and the size of the vertical projection of an object.

Converging support or the use of different cognitive processes in judgment of apparent and objectivc size was obtained by Epstcin and Broota (1975), who found objective sizc judgments to bc slower and a lincar function of the distance to the stimulus object, whercas apparent size judgments wer faster and unrclated to distance. Brunswik (95) all them to "be so certain that they could bet on the actual size," clearly influences the judgments. Finally, and probably most important, the obscrved improvement of psychophysical judgments with practicc (see Gibson, 1969) appears to implicate cognitive mcchanisms (sce Chapter 3). Some recent results by Ericsson and Faivre (1982) show that performancc in a perceptual learning expcriment can bc bcst described in terms of thc acquisition of cognitive structures indentificd from retrospective verbal reports.

A related class of learning situations involve control of body functions—likc heart rate, audiomotor performance—through biofeedback. In a very interesting revicw, Roberts and Marlin (1979) discuss the fairly cxtensive rescarch (with conflicting results) on how reported awareness mediates devclopment of control of these body functions. They define veridical content as vcrbally reported information making reference to "activities or perceptual events that are correlated with target bchavior and therefore with fecdback presentation" (Roberts and Marlin, 1979, p. 81), and discuss circumstances favorable to the generation of such reports. Thcy point to two main biasing sources. Instructions in thesc biofccdback tasks often cxplicitly tell subjects to avoid certain strategics, like regulation of brcathing rate. Other instructions give subjects incorrect information (c.g., that ratc of heart bcats is unrclated to ratc of brcathing). It is clear that such instructions will bias thc subject against reporting such information regardless of thcir thoughts. These studics indicate that subjects can report the strategics they use for achieving control of visceral functions.

In a subscquent study, Robcrts, Marlin, Kclcher, and Williams (1982) provide some supportive evidencc for the claims of validity of verbal reports made by Roberts and Marlin (1979). In most other studics, subjects are informed what visceral function is to be controlled, but this information may inducc infcrential processing, and also climinatcs the possibility of using statemcnts on what function is involvcd to validate thc verbalizcd thought. In two studics described by Roberts et al., (1982), subjects wcrc not told which visccral functions wcre involved and were simply shown an indicator of the function to be controlled. Subjects gavc written descriptions of how thcy achieved control immediatcly after training. All subjects devcloping control over the visceral function invariably showcd cvidcnce for accurate sclf-report regarding their processing, as asscssed by blind judges of written dcscriptions.

Our framework for analyzing verbal reports also applies well to psychophysical experiments. Similar methodological and thcoretical issues arise in the two domains, cspccially with rcgard to the instructions given subjects. Moreover, there is evidence of subjects' awareness of process even in the reports from these "simple" and "basic" psychophysical tasks.

## Reports of Information in STM

Next we will revicw bricfly somc types of verbal reporting from STM that arc closcly rclatcd to those alrcady discusscd, but which have been uscd so frequently that thcy havc cmergcd as separate procedures with separate litcratures.

In thought sampling an attempt is made to get data on subjects' thoughts while thcy are pcrforming their daily activities. Subjects are given a portable tone gencrator, which gencratcs toncs at random times. When a tonc sounds, the subjects are to stop thcir normal activity and write down their thoughts, and perhaps additional information.

Genest and Turk (198l) provide a nicc review of the cmerging research using this method. In most cases the mcthod is non-directive, rcquesting a report of the hecdcd thought at the timc the tone was heard. Yet, the report is retrospcctive and often a fair amount of time will intervenc before the subject can makc his written record. Kendall and Korgeski (1979) proposc that subjects should bc providcd with portable tape rccorders so reporting will be more immediate and less disruptive. Genest and Turk (1981) also discuss event recording, whcrc subjects are asked to record all instanccs of a certain type of thought. It is not unlikely that such instructions will lcad to conscious monitoring and increase the frequency of thoughts of the obscrvcd kind. Unlike thought sampling, evcnt recording is mostly uscd with maladaptivc thoughts, with the aim of identifying their content rather than mcasuring their frequency.

Another widely uscd tcchnique is thought listing, where the subject is asked to write down all thoughts that occurrcd during an interval.This techniquc is in many cascs indistinguishablc from the retrospective reporting discussed carlicr. It is different in emphasizing thoughts as distinguishable clements. Whcre thoughts are clicited through associations to externally prescnted information, and are relativcly disconnected from each other, one would expcct reporting thoughts to be casy and unambiguous. Reports of thc lists of thoughts from an interconnected thought activity like mental multiplication will undoubtedly be more difficult. In a nice review, Cacioppo and Petty (1981) note that most of the studi usig hougt lsng hav sd thoughs voked by persuasive communication.

## Reports of Information in ITM

Subjects are often askcd to report information that has no rclation to their immediately preccding thoughts. The general format is to ask the subject a question and often also to provide a sct of alternative answers. According to our model, the subject nccds to comprchend the question and retrieve relevant information from mcmory. Retricval can in some cascs procced dircctly from comprchcnsion of the question (i.c., "In what year wcre you born?"). More often the subject needs to generate retricval cues to access relevant memory traccs (i.c., "How many times have you been to a movie thcater in the last two months?"). In Chapter 3 we will consider in more dctail the process of retrieval of information and in Chapter 5 wc discuss studies of thc retrieval process using protocol analysis. Here we wish to show that simply by asking by what processes the subject can makc his responses we can arrive at some useful conclusions about these matters.

Our model makes a major distinction betwcen information directly storcd in memory and information that is gcncrated and produced. The first class compriscs factual information and information about expcricnces and pcrccived cvents and bchavior in past situations. The sccond class compriscs information about reactions and bchavior in hypothctical situations, including gcncral and abstractly describcd situations.

Reports of Past Experience. When we ask somebody to report somcthing they should know and the report is not accurate, we may be inclincd to distrust the method of asking (i.e., thc verbal rcport). Such evidcnce is, of coursc, particularly damaging if we lack methods to validate evcn occasionally thc rcported information. In survcys, subjects are oftcn asked many different qucstions. One qucstion that is fairly easy to validate is "How old arc you?". Some studies have shown the reported information to be invalid in as many as 83% of cascs (Parry & Crossley, 1950). At first glancc, that may bc rather surprising, as most people should know their age. lnvalid reports might indicate prcmcditated lying, which of course is always a possibility. But asking for somcbody's age is unfortunate, as age changes each year. If we rely on direct retrieval of our age, we may access information stored carlier which is no longer valid. Bjork (1978) has shown that a similar analysis can account for experiences of children appearing to grow very fast or parents aging very fast. When we sce the child or the parent, we access an image of them, which was not the most recently scen image but one stored at an carlier timc, hence the too big difference betwcen perception and image. It is, of course, possible to derive onc's age from one's birthdate, but the calculation requires mental cffort, and can lcad to crrors and attempts to estimate the answer. This is cspccially truc when the subject does not pcrccive the necd to be completcly accurate. Asking for somebody's birthdate would be much better as it remains fixed.

In other cases, the invalidity of reported information can be traced to issues of definition. In answering how many rooms thcy have in their housc or apartment, subjects may differ in thcir idcas of what constitutes a room. Karlton and Schuman (1980) cite a study of the English census that showed that people were accurate in reporting the number of rooms according to their own definitions, but thcy simply did not use the census definition.

The problems in obtaining valid reports become more pronounced if the subject doesn't have the rclevant information readily accessible in memory. When we ask subjects how often thcy havc been to the doctor or thc dentist, cxpericnced various forms of crimcs, or made airplane trips during some specified time interval, wc would expect them to retrieve all these instances from memory, and attempt to verify that they occurred during the given time interval. However, if only the number of instances is to be reported, wc have no way to monitor the subjects' retrieval activity and thcy may estimate rather than recall the instances.

When subjects are asked to recall instances, investigators have found the retrieved information to be valid. The common error appears to bc inability to date instances and hcncc to detcrmine whether they occurred within the given timc interval. For highly salient and retrievable instances, this may lcad to overreporting. By asking subjects to recall instancs before as wcll as after the critical time period, such overreporting can be virtually eliminated.

A multitude of issues surround the use of fixcd response alternatives to questions (sec Schuman and Presser (1981) for an cxtensive review). In the ideal casc, the subject retricves his response and selects teappropriate response altenative.Theresults om studsui open-ended questions and fixed responses should then be very similar, but in many cases they are not. In an interesting analysis, Schuman and Presser (1981) showed that the main source of discrepancy was the unvbilyltivcl from the open-ended responses in a preliminary study they showed that much closer correspondence could be obtained betwcen the two types of responses in a subsequcnt study. In fact, providing the set of rclevant alternatives may reducc retrieval failures and hencc enhance the validity of responses. We will talk later about possible effcts of bringing to mind certain kinds of information that the subjcct may not have thought of otherwisc. It is intcresting that in Schuman and Presser's (1981) study, subjects recalling the most preferred aspect of a job gave most responses with the same frequencies as when they selected the responses from alternatives.

The concern for achieving accurate recall of information is quite explicit in current survey rescarch. Karlton and Schuman (1980) review thrce methods used by Cannell and his collcagues to achieve more accurate reporting. First, the subject should be given an cxplicit instruction to recall accurately. We know that people do bctter when they think carcfully about each question, search thcir memory, and take their time in answering. Pcople also do bctter if thcy give exact answers, and give as much information as they can. This includcs important things as well as things which may seem small or unimportant (From Canncll ct al., 1981, revicwed in Karlton and Schuman (1980, p. 16)). Sccond, thc interviewer should give more scnsitive fcedback and, in particular, monitor the retrieval process. For cxample. when subjccts gives quick responses, they should be cncouraged to think and retricve more. I ast, the interviewer should try to gct the subject to makc an cxplicit agreement to respond accurately and completely.

Reports of Hypothetical and General Information. Verbal reports that do not specify a clcar relation to rctrievable cxpcriences, events, or knowledge are of scveral kinds. We want to distinguish vcrbal reports on rcactions or behavior in hypothetical situations from verbal reports on reactions or behavior towards persons, ideas, and cxperience in general without spccification of more spccific context or situation.

Occasionally, wc find verbal reports about hypothetical situations uscd in experimental psychology. For examplc, in a study by Recd and Johnsen (1977), subjects wcre asked how they would solve a problem if it wcre presented to them again. Subjects in a study by Nisbett and Wilson (1977) were asked how they would react to a story if some passages had not been presented. However, the most frequent and important use has been opinion-polls, surveys and personality and attitude assessment. Personality and attitudc assessment will bc discussed later in a separate section.

We cannot offer a detailed model of the cognitive processes that generate a response to an attitude or opinion question. In fact, given our model, it is quite puzzling how somcbody can acccss and intcgrate the multitude of relevant aspccts and experiences at the time of the question. ("Ihe situation is, of course, quite different whcn the assessment has already bccn made prior to the question and can be directly accessed.) A possible vicw is that the question or statement serves as a retricval cue to access a small subsct of sclected information, which is cvaluated and used as a basis for responding. The consistency of accesscd information and responsc to the same statement at different times will be dctermined by the organization of I.TM—a point wc will discuss in more detail in Chapter 3.

A review of the litcrature shows that such a simple association modcl has some support, cspccially for attitudcs and opinions that are modcrate and refer to non-central issues. Even whcn pcople are responding repeatcdly to the same itcms within a rclativcly short time interval like a year, intcrcorrclations arc relatively low (around 0.40) (Schuman & Presser, 1981). The principal exceptions are strong attitudes to central issues. The most likcly locus of the variability bctwcen test occasions is in the in formation accessed.

More direct evidence for the sclective cucing of information comes from the cxtensive body of rescarch showing effects of wording questions in different ways. For example, subjects arc much more willing "not to allow" public speechcs against democracy than to "forbid" such specches. Schuman and Presser (1981) shows similar cffects for "not allowing" vs. "forbidding" other activitics. Even in laboratory studies where subjects are cxposcd to the same events and information, the wording of the qucstion (i.c., How long was the film? vs. How short was the film?), yields reliable differences, cven when the same response alternatives wcrc uscd. Although we lack cvidcnce about what information was accessed, the direction of thc influcnce is consistent with the hypothesis of selective access of information.

In a situation where subjects' attitudes and opinions are measured, the retrieved information will not simply reflect thc current question, for information retrieved on preceding questions will be more accessible and mor ey   a c  .The u used to study the influence of answering preceding qucstions is to manipulate the order of presentation of questions and compare the responses to the same question in the different orders. Although most questions or ites do not show such order efects, or at least sufficintly e aally vl a the effects are quite largc. Schuman and Presser (1981) discussed two t whehe ntetaton  hecapars qui trai ward.

Communist reporter item:

Do you think the United Stales should let Communist newspaper

reporters from other countries come in here and send back

to their papers the news as they see it?

American reporter item:

Do you think a Communist country like Russia should let American newspaper reporters come in and send back to America the news as they see it?   
sce it?

The effect of interest is that subjects are more likely to be favorable to letting forcign reporters operate in the USA if they have previously answered the item regarding Ictting American rcporters operate in Communist countries (sce Schuman and Presser (1981) for a comprehensive revicw of similar effects). Interesting effects of previous questions are also shown in a recent study by Bishop, Oldcndick, and Tuchfarber (1982). They were ablc to show that subjects' assessed general interest in politics and thc coming clcction was markcdly influenccd by preceding questions on facts regarding the clcction, like names of candidates for President, and voting records of their representativcs in Congress.

In two experiments Bishop ct al. (1982) showcd separately that easy preccding questions (tapping information most pcople know) led to highcr assesscd interest levels, and hard preccding questions led to a decrease in assessed interest levels. The cffects interacted with the knowledge pcople had about politics and thc election. Highly knowlcdgcable subjects werc unaffected by preceding easy qucstions, whercas subjects with less information wcrc affccted. Hard questions had a rather uniform effect of reducing subjects' assessed interest in the clection and politics.

Admittedly, our discussion of cognitive processes in these unstructured verbal report situations is rather speculative. As far as wc know, almost no attempts havc becn made to determine with the aid of verbal rcports what information is acccssed in such situations and by what processes. However, there is evidence suggesting that this would be feasible. First, open-cnded questions where subjects arc asked to name aspects and issues have bccn quitc successful. Sccond, Schuman (1966) showcd that asking subjects to claborate thcir closed-choice sclections for randomly selected items (random probe techniquc) was uscful in evaluating understanding of the item when it was translated and used in a different culture. Finally, some of the tasks uscd by Karl Buhler (1908a,b) are rather similar to deciding one's opinion on a statcment. He found subjccts able to provide informative scqucnces of thoughts about their opinions. A more complcte cmpirical analysis of thc thought processes should yicld interesting implications for improvement and rcdesign of the mcthods used to assess attitudes, opinions and other gcneral constructs. Bclow wc will consider in more detail psychological rescarch concerned with assessing attitudes and its rclation to verbal reporting.

## VERBAL REPORTS IN ASSESSMENT STUDIES

In discussing various forms of verbal reporting that claim to elicit currently hceded information or cognitive structures that remain in memory, we have indicated how several differcnt kinds of cognitive processes might generate the reported information. One of our major assertions is that verbal reports can bc, and should bc, undcrstood in cxactly the same way as we understand other kinds of responses.

As a concrcte application of our approach to a major area of psychological rescarch, lct us scc what a first-pass analysis of verbal reports in questionnairc-answcring might yicld. In particular, let us look at the assessment rescarch aimcd at mcasuring and describing individual differences, cspecially differences in cognitive structure. 'This research has adopted many of the ideas advocatcd by Watson. The approach has been to scarch for aspects of behavior that remain invariant over some class of situations, yct discriminate onc individual from another. Collecting obscrvations and discovering behavioral regularitics (especially with the help of correlational techniqucs) have been cmphasized over theoretical analysis. Much of thc rescarch has been directed towards useful "rcal-world" applications: selecting pcople for cducation, jobs, and various forms of clinical treatment.

It has bcen customary to interpret invariant aspects of bchavior that arc found by assessment in terms of postulated internal states or traits. Geral biles, ical kilaassciat with tait many stable aspects of personality, like aggressiveness. In the approach described above, which we will term indirect assessment, the invariant structures are induccd from many spccific observations.

Within the same framework, attempts have been made to gain information about these general invariant structures more directly. Instead of time-consuming observation of subjects' behaviors in concrete situations (e.g., while sclecting food dishes), onc could ask for thcir reactions to a verbal description of a gencral class of situations (e.g., "Do you like to cat fish?") and thus seck to access general preferences directly.

Alternatively, one can ask subjects after thcy have cxhibited some bchavior why they did it, hoping to reccive a report of a general motive that could cxplain or predict thcir behavior over a wide range of situations.This rescarch has taken a basically mpirical approach to finding bchavioral rcgularities, and it has not attemptcd to spccify the cognitive mcchanisms that both generatc bchavior and are accessible for verbal questioning. Implicit referencc is made to the common-sense notion that pcople arc aware and rational and thcrefore able to answcr qucstions about the cognitive structures responsible for thcir overt behavior.

## Data

In consistency with the bchaviorist viewpoint, the rescarch on direct and indircct assessment has not collected obscrvations and data about the processcs that gencrate the target behavior. Concurrent verbalizations, rctrospectivc reports, and latencics have bcen collected and analyzed only very sparingly.

Indirect assessment mcthods have been uscd primarily and most successfully to assess cognitive abilities. In ability tests a sample of representative tasks for the ability in question is gcncrated, and the subjects' responses are cvaluated for correctness. A givcn subject's ability is then assessed in terms of his or hcr pattern of success on the items. The cognitive structures are inferred only indirectly.

To creatc representativc situations that will clicit bchavior reflecting hypothcsized traits—likc prcfcrcncc, aggressiveness, and other personality-bascd characteristics—is much harder. Somc rescarch has cmployed obscrvers to rccord subjects' bchaviors in natural cnvironments or in scmi-controlled group interactions. Howcver, most of the research has cmployed morc direct assessmcnt procedures. We have distinguished four methods that produce different kinds of data for assessing traits. Some of these distinctions have bcen proposed by Olson (1976).

1. In the first type of assessment procedure, observers who study the subjects' bchavior in one or sevcral typcs of situations afterwards make direct estimates of the "levels" of certain traits for the subjects. These ratings by the observers constitute the data.

2. In thc second type of procedure, the subjects' memories are probed for their previous bchavior or covert reactions in particular classes of situations. Thc subjects arc generally askcd to respond with onc alternative from a predctermincd sct, which asks about the frequency (c.g., "never," "occasionally." "often," ctc.) of thc bchavior.

3. A third type of procedure obtains subjects' reactions to verbal stimuli or thcir prcdictcd actions in gencral situations verbally described. We give an example of a stimulus and an cxcerpt from an instruction given to subjcts (taken from Mischel, 1968, pp. 61-62):

I enjoy social gatherings just to be with pcople. (Item from California Psychological Inventory.)

Your first impression is generally the best so work quickly and don't be concerned about duplications, contradictions or being exact. (From instructions to the I.eary Interpersonal Check List.)

The data in this case are the categorics (c., "very much," "not at all," ctc.) that the subject sclects, and the rcsponses are not conceptualized as introspcctive reports about thc associated traits.

In the fourth type of procedure, subjects are asked for explanations of, or motives for, their obscrved bchavior. When the subjects are asked how thcy werc thinking throughout the cxpcriment or why they exhibited particular bchavior, the cxperimenter secks to learn directly from them the underlying cognitive structure that produced the overt behavior.

## Effectiveness of Assessment

Isentivlt cesul in predicting bchavioral differenccs in real-world situations.This stands in rather stark contrast with the controversi surrounding assessment (direct or indirect) of personality traits and direct assessment of cognitive structures ingencral.Correlations between different methods and tests for assessing the same personality traits are oftcn unsatisfactorily low (e.g., Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Reported reasons for behavior are unrelated to experimcntally induced variations in bchavior (e.g., Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Reported attitudes do not correspond to actual bchavior (e.g., Calder & Ross, 1973: Schuman & Johnson, 1976; Wicker, 1969).

In trying to explain the relative success of indirect assessment of cognitive abilities as comparcd with other types of indircct assessment, we consider the differences in the cognitive processes involved and the cognitive structures accessed. Unfortunately, there has been little research directed toward uncovering processes, most analyses having been made on data representing the final result of the processes. Iacking extensive data on the relevant processes. we will procced by making assumptions derived from other arcas of cognition where more such data have been gathered. First, we will note some gencral differences between the kinds of cognitive processes evoked by ability tests and the kinds evoked by personality tests and direct assessments. Then, we will turn to a discussion based on a more detailed explication of the cognitive processes underlying probes to assess cognitive structures directly.

## Processes Evoked by Assessment

There are at least three marked differences betwcen the cognitive processes cvoked by items in an ability tcst and those evoked by items in a test to assess traits by sclf-reports. The first differencc concerns the likelihood that the rclevant cognitive processes and structures are actually cvoked or accessed. The "first impression" requcsted by the instruction, quoted above, for self-reports and the cmphasis that responses are ncither right nor wrong. stand in stark contrast to the instructions for ability tests, whcre responses are considered carefully before being produced and arc cither correct or incorrect. In order to generate the correct answer or response in an ability test, the information has to be processcd carcfully by the rclevant sequence of operations. The probability that a subject can generate the answer by guessing or some shortcircuiting procedure like first impression, is small. There is, thus, much more cxperimental control for ability items than for sclf-report items over the cognitive processes and structures that are activated to generate a response.

For self-report items, uninteresting response processes (like always agrecing with the statcinent or simply selecting the socially desirable alternative) often appear to account for a sizcable fraction of the variancc. Howcver, by careful sclcction of qucstionnaire items, more recent studies havc reduccd the cxtent to which subjects can rcly on such critcria as social desirability in choosing their answers.

The sccond difference between ability tests and others derives from the rclation betwcen the test item and the "rcal" situation in which the actual non-test behavior occurs. Many symbolic tasks occurring in the "real" situations, like arithmctic, are rather accuratcly represented by a test item. By contrast, verbal description of a social intcractive situation is usually a rather poor representation of the situation, which fails to communicate many cssential aspects that would influcncc the actual nontest bchavior. We will return to this issue later.

## Memories versus Inferences

The frequent low correlations betwcen different assessment tests of the same trait provide grounds for sccpticism about verbal reports.

Inaccuracy has bccn attributcd mainly to a variety of distorting motivational forces, including dcliberate faking, lack of insight, and unconscious dcfensivc rcactions, all of which prcsumably produce inaccurate sclf-descriptions (Mischel, 1968, p. 69).

However, Mischcl (1968) points to rescarch supporting other possibilites, which arc consistent with the notion that subjects are able to describc and predict specific bchavior with minimal interpretation of its meaning. The sclf-reports dcscribcd so far rcquirc the subjects' global interprctations of their own gcncral behavior patterns, rathcr than descriptions of spccific bchavior. Likcwise, thc attributes assessed by observers are mostly high-level traits that require considcrable inference. Correlations could bc low betwcen different assessments because they clicited different in ferences rather than because of conflict of cvidence at the level of description of spccific bchavior. In support of this view, Mischcl (1968) cites rescarch showing that inter-coder reliabilities increasc rapidly as the nccessity for complex inference decreases. For further discussion of the spccial problems of assessments by observers sce Fiske (1978) and Mischel (1968).

Remembered versus Anticipated Behaviors. In a more dctailed analysis of the cognitive processes occuring in assessment procedures, we need to distinguish probing subjects' memories for past processes and occurrences of acts and rcactions, on the one hand, from probing for subjects' anticipated responses in verbally described situations or to described classes of objects or people.

First we will address probing for subjects' memorics. We will assume that information about specific past behavior and covert reactions is generally stored incpisodic form inI.This implics that a atement about occurrences of a cecrtain kind will rcquirc access to the memoryall relevant speciic occuencs of that kin.For simplty, wc will not discuss thc cxceptions, where subjccts have becn asked silar qustns beor r av, by t own reciv activiy, ay generated the corresponding general information, which then can be accessed directly.

From general rescarch on recall, we know that ability to recall specific events-espccially with dctailed information-dcteriorates rapidly with time (sce Cannell & Kahnciman, 1968). Recall depends very much on the availability of retrieval cucs. Sincc gencral verbal descriptions of classes of events most often will bc insufficicnt as cues for retricving specific events, subjccts will have to supply additional information to generate more specific cucs, likc the rclevant timc pcriod and spccific situations in which the activity might have occurred. If the experimenter specifies the relcvant timc pcriod and particular type of cvcnts to bc recalled, recall incrcases considerably (c.g., Biderman, 1967). This type of recall is very time consuming and can hardly take place in the time allotted for filling out a qucstionnaire, unless the relevant cpisodes were few and casily retrieved because of recency.

If the subjects werc ablc and motivated to retrievc all relevant episodes, they would face the problem of converting the information into fixcd alternatives, like "oftcen," "frequently,"etc.Mischel (1968) cites a study by Simpson, that demonstratcd that a wide range of pcrcentages were associated with such words, when presentcd out of context. For cxample, onc fourth of Simpson's subjccts associated "frequently" with events occurring over 80% of thc timc. whcrcas another fourth associated it with events occurring less than 40% of the timc. The processing activity that would be necdcd for accurate responses to qucstions about past overt and covert bchavior—given the limits of recallability—appears to be incompatible with the rclativcly fast responses requested.

Causes of Behavior. L.et us now turn to thc qucstioning of subjects about thc rcasons or causcs of thcir bchavior. In terms of our model, legitimate probes for reasons and motives for obscrved behavior in a given process are just one kind of cue for retrieving information sclectivcly from the memory trace of that process. From studies of current verbalization of hecded information, we know that subjccts often gencrate goals in solving problems, hypotheses in conccpt-formation experiments, and cvaluations in dccision making. It should bc possible to clicit these by probes of why a specific overt bchavior occurred.

One should not assume that the subjects can assess directly that specific responses were "caused" indircctly by more gencral goals or hypothescs. Cognitive processes oten involve attention to spccific information, which is not a specification of hecdcd gencral structurcs likc goals. Information is hcedcd in other cases as a result of direct recognition processcs without any intcrmcdiate states cntcring consciousness. In thesc cases thc subject cannot answer a why qucstion by dircct retricval from memory.

Much of the research cited by Nisbctt and Wilson (1977) and revicwcd above concerns cxperiments where the subjccts have been questioned about a long serics of cxperimcntal trials. When subjects are askcd about their average behavior or motives, thcy obviously cannot answer the questions by retricving a single motive or cpisodic memory. The behavior on different trials may correspond to very different cognitive processes, and it may in any event be difficult to rctrieve them all from memory. Thereforc, it is reasonable to assumc that thc subject cither infers general motives or processes from retricved sclcted cpisodic memorics, or trics to rationalize his bchavior using other sourccs of information than the memory of the processes.

Smith and Miller (1978) noted that in many of the experiments citcd by Nisbett and Wilson the subjects were askcd why their bchavior in one condition of the experiment differed from other subjects' behavior in other conditions of the cxperiment. In such a situation, it is not clear to subjects that thcir memory is relevant for answering the question, as shown by the following initial stcp of a typical dialogue:

Question: I noticc that you took more shock than average. Why do you suppose you did?

Typical answer: Gce, I don't really know . . . Well, I used to build radios and stuff when I was 13 or 14, and maybe 1 got used to clectric shock. (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977, p. 237)

The subject appcars to understand the asscrtion to mcan that he took more shock than other subjects in the same condition, and he therefore probed his memory for explanations that would be independent of valid report, has to rely on his memory for his carlier procssing, it would be nccessary for him to have expcrienced both experimental conditions to explain any differences in bchavior betwcen them. Infcrring what one would do in a new situation should not bc confounded with reporting actual mcmory of completed processes.

Predictive Responses. In the casc of asking subjects for their reactions to classes of persons or objects or their expectations of thcir behavior in vcrbally describcd situations, wc have little data on what cognitive processes and structures are cvoked. It is most plausible to assume that the subject forms some kind of rcpresentation or "image" of what is verbally described, and uscs this to dcterminc his hypothctical reaction or bchavior. LaPicre (1934) questioned thc cxtent to which subjects in many situations are able to represent internally the crucial aspects of the verbally describcd situations. Any such failure will make thcir conceived behavior different from actual nontest behavior.

Thus from a hundred or a thousand reponses to the question "Would you get up to give an Armenian woman your seat in a street car?" the investigator derives the "attitude" of non-Armenian malcs towards Armenian females. Now the qucstion may be constructcd with claborate skill and hidden with consumate cunning in a maze of supplementary or even irrelevant qucstions yct all that has bcen obtained is a symbolic responsc to a symbolic situation. The words "Armenian woman" do not constitute an Armenian woman of flesh and blood, who might bc tall or squat, fat or thin, old or young, wcll or poorly dressed—who might, in fact, be a goddess or just another old and dirty hag. And the questionnaire response, whether it be "yes" or "no," is but a verbal rcaction and this does not involvc rising from the scat or stolidly avoiding the hurt cyes of the hypothctical woman and the derogatory stares of other strcet-car occupants. (LaPicre, 1934, p. 230)

In his classic study, LaPicre (1934) studicd attitudes and behavior towards Orientals. Six months after a large number of hotels and restaurants had been visited by an Oricntal couple, thc samc places were sent a qucstionnaire with the question. "Will you acccpt members of the Chincsc race as guests in your cstablishment?" The ovcrwhelming majority of the places visited answered "no," with a smaller number saying "under some circumstances." Similar disassociation of verbal responses to symbolic situations from rcal bchavior has been found by, for example, Kutner, Wilkins, and Yarrow (1952).

In information processing terms, I aPicre's hypothesis is that, in the cases wherc the gencrated internal representaton contains all relevant aspccts appropriatcly portrayed as in the "rcal" situation, the behavior and verbally reported behavior will be consistent. When the "rcal" situation is more or less symbolic, as in the case of voting, accurate predictions can usually bc made for actual bchavior on an aggrcgatc level from verbal reactions to questions (scc Schuman & Johnson, 1976). Similarly, Katona (1975, 1979) has found that samplcd subjects' rcports of their expectations of future priccs, futurc incomc, and so on, give valid information for predicting changes in purchasing bchavior for thc gencral population to which thcy bclong. Ajzcn and Fishbcin (1977) show in a recent revicw that when the attitude mcasurement situation corresponds closcly to the situation in which the bchavior to be predicted occurs, high agrcement between attitudes and bchavior is found. Fazio and Zanna (1978) have found that extended direct cxpcricnce with specific cntities leads to better defined attitudes (and stablc internal representations evoked by the questionnaire items), which can bctter predict subsequent bchavior. Whcn the information in focus of attention is taken into account, attitudes appcar to be consistent with cach other and with behavior (Taylor & Fiske, 1978).

This brief overview of controversics about direct assessment by verbal probing and questioning shows clcarly that a detailed modcl of cognitive processes and cognitive structures is nccded for making decisions on when and how to use this type of assessment procedure.

We know of only two studics that collected concurrent reports (Schneider-Duker & Schneider, 1977) or retrospective rcports (Kuncel, 1973) for thinking during responscs to personality tests. Although the results from these studics are promising, much more must be done to understand how pcrsonality tests should bc constructed to measure cognitive structures.

## HISTORY OF VERBAL REPORTS AND INTROSPECTION

A good test of the adequacy and uscfulness of our analysis of cognitive processes involved in vcrbal reporting is to scc whcther such an analysis can shed light on why some forms of verbal rcport, likc introspection, were problematic, while other forms of verbal rcport, lkc psychophysics judgments, gave uniform and accepted results. This discussion of the cyosvalization i hohatmanhfculti from the requirements imposed on subjectsin generating the reorts.

Farly speculations about the human mind and human subjective epenc wee cos latdt lgous n phisohicl quons about the nature of man. The human mind was generally viewed as beyond understanding in scientific terms. However, individual philosophers did attempt to inquire about the mcchanisms responsible for acquiring new knowledge and the correspondence betwcen the external world and subjective experience.

The basic source of information for these inquiries was obscrvation by philosophers of thcir own cognitive processes—that is, introspection. The analyses werc dirccted towards very general issucs and questions about the mechanisms and structure of human mind, and were primarily speculativc, with little concern for cstablishing cmpirical support for the proposed ideas. Spcculations and sclf-observations werc inextricably mixed, for thcy wcre all the products of the same individual. Although many of the proposals for mechanisms bccame influential in subsequent thcorizing, this type of inquiry gradually became suspcct as not conforming to scientific method.

One could observe a similar pattern of spcculation for extending our knowledge about the physical environment bcfore a distinctive scientific approach cmergcd to the analysis of physical phcnomena. The scientific approach distinguishes betwcen facts and thcorics, regarding as facts only "indisputable" observations. Mcthods of controlled observation and experimental manipulation are cssential components of the scientific method. It was several centurics after thc cmcrgcnce of the natural scicnces bcfore scicntific methods began to bc applied to the study of mind and human bchavior.

Considcrable effort has been devoted in psychology, as in other sciences, to specifying what constitutes "indisputable cvidence." Since all observations arc made by humans, it was important to sccure general agrcement on what kinds of observations rcflcct the cxtcrnal world rather than idiosyncracies of the individual obscrver. Complex assessments were questioned or discarded as cmpirical evidence, for they werc judged to embody inferences and knowlcdgc not shared by all observers. Complex assessments wcre also thought to be scnsitivc to thc cxpectations and subjective biases of observers. By contrast, simple perceptual judgments bascd on sensory qualitics, like colors, wcre found to bc invariant over different observers and, in principle, indcpcndent of such biasing factors as differences in knowledge and earlier experience.

## Introspection

In the early years of psychology, the dircct observation of mind in operation was takcn as the primary mcthod for obtaining information about the mind and its contents. William James uscd introspection (broadly construed) naturally and unself-consciously as a major tool of investigation.

Introspective (bservation is what we have to rely on first and foremost and always. T'he word introspection nced hardly bc defincd—it mcans, of coursc, thc looking into our own minds and rcporting what we thcre discovcr. (James, 1890, p. 185)

Another pionecr, Binet, wcnt so far as to makc the dcfinition of psychology contingent in terms of the introspective method.

Introspection is the basis of psychology; it characterizes psychology in so precisc a way that cvcry study which is made by introspection deserves to bc callcd psychological, while every study which is made by another method belongs to some other scicncc. (In Titchener, 1912b, p. 429)

At the turn of the century there was a conscnsus about the value of naive introspection.

We need not hesitate to admit, on the other hand, that a roughly phenomenological account, a dcscription of consciousness, as it shows itsclf to common scnse, may be useful or even necessary as a starting-point of a truly psychological description. (Titchener, 1912c, p. 490)

However, as we shall scc, naive introspcction was soon dcemed to be as unscientific as casual obscrvation of natural evcnts would be for the natural sciences. In order to provide facts about the mind, morc rigorous and systematic methods of introspection were rcquired.

Structuralism. 'The main aim of Titchener's rescarch was to gather facts about consciousness (the content of mind), and in the process to uncover its structure. Thc facts consisted of subjects' direct descriptions of consciousness, whercas inferences and gcncralizations bascd on conscious expcricnces werc not accepted.

But the data of introspection arc never thcmselves explanatory; they tcll us nothing of mcntal causation, or of physiological dependencc, or of genctic derivation. The ideal introspective report is an accurate description, madc in the nrst  psycholoy se conscius procesCusaion, dependencc, development are then matters of inference. (Titchener, 1912c, p. 486)

Titchener proposed to separate theory from facts by letting the in ferential process to the experimenter.

To the question of how the contents of consciousness should be reported, Titchener proposed a description in terims of the sensory components of thought. There appcar to be at lcast two partly different reasons for this choicc. The first is thcory-bascd and should be seen as a hypothesis. Titchener, like Wundt, held thc hypothesis that all mental states and cxpericnces could bc describcd in terms of their sensory and imaginal components. Wundt's thcsis was that human cxperience of external stimulation has two phases. First, the invariant sensory attributes of the stimulation are immediatcly expericnced. Then, mediating processes occur, rclating the scnsory stimulation to existing general knowledge and prior cxperiences. According to Wundt, it is the result of the second phase that constitutes the cognitive phcnomena we call consciousness.

Wundt assumed that we are born with the scnsory components of the first stage already fixcd, and that thcy remain unchangcd throughout lifc. Changes in the way we experience the same scnsory stimulation are duc to changes in the associations cvokcd by the stimulation (i.e., are the result of the sccond stagc). Assuming that all knowledge is ultimately derived from experience (the assumption of Iocke's cmpiricism), and that all cxperience corresponds to a conglomerate of sensations, it follows that the structure of mind and consciousness, including thought, could be describcd in terms of sensory components. In thc scarch for intersubjective invariants and general psychological laws, it was thcrcfore natural to concentrate on the structurc of the immediate sensations.

The sccond reason for Titchener's choice of a vocabulary of consciousness is basically mcthodological, and derives from the difficulty of transmitting the conscious cxpericnce without contaminating it through words with imprecisc mcanings.

1 quote an illustration from Titchencr; a half-trained student reports in an cxperiment a fccling of "pcrplexity." Now pcrplexity is clcarly a complex expericncc. A group of processes is present, somc of which we can cxperience in other contexts, disjoined from cach other. Truc, I have a fair idea of what he has cxpericnced. But only a fair idca. The description should be so full and complete that one can imaginativcly or sympathetically reconstruct the experience. (English, 1921, p. 406)

Titchener's proposal was that consciousness should be described in terms of its clementary components.

By the "description" of an object we mcan an account so full and so dcfinite that one to whom the object itsclf is unfamiliar can nevcrthcless, given skill and materials, reconstruct it from the verbal formula. Every discriminable part or feature of thc object is unambiguously namcd; there is a onc-to-one corrclation of symbols and the cmpirical items symbolised; and the logical order of the specifications is the order of casiest reconstruction. This, then, is what we mean by "description" in psychology. (Titchener, 1912a, p. 165)

This proccdure is analogous to transimitting a picture as a pattern of dots—as on a TV screen--where no biasing semantic descriptors are required. The analogy may be considcrcd a fair approximation to Titchener's idea, for hc says "the record must be photographically accurate" (Titchener, 1909). This view harmonizes well with the conservativc critcria for simple perceptual obscrvations used in the natural scicnces, and with the notion that introspection is analogous to inspcction in physics, but with consciousness as its target of observation.

In thcir cfforts to find the elementary units of thinking, the structuralists searched not only for the elements of thought-content, but also for the elementary processes involved in thinking. Relatively early, Wundt started to pursue rescarch along the lines of Donders, who is scen as the pioneer in the analysis of cognitive processes by means of obscrved latencics. Donders' central idca was that more complex processes could be viewed as comnpounded additively from simple rcactions and the other cognitive processes. Thrce different tasks wcre proposed by Donders to estimate the durations of the most basic cognitive processes (i.e., stimulus discrimination and response selection). The simplest is simple reaction lime, wherc thc subject responds with a given single response, like a button-prcss, as soon as a stimulus is presented (a-reaction). In the c-reaction the subject responds only to a certain type of stimulus with a given single response. The c-reaction was assumed to differ from the a-reaction by requiring an initial discrimination of the stimulus. For the b-reaction the subject responds for each stimulus with a different response, and thus is required not only to discriminate but also to select the correct response. Wundt extended this method by proposing an additional reaction that we will discuss in the next scction.

Data.Titchener rclied primarily on introspective reports given after the completion of the processes, but the latencics of the cognitive proceses were also used inhis analyses. The introspective reports equested by Titchener were very different from the phenomenal accounts provided by naive introspection. Subjects required extensive practice to brcak away from their habits of giving phenomenal accounts. They had an initial tendency to commit the "stimulus error," which was to report inormation reflecting previous experience and knowledge from the second stage (for example, to report "sccing a book"), instead of reporting the scnsory and imaginal components of the thought or presented stimulation. The cxtent of training required is indicated by Boring (1953), who mentions that Wundt rcquired his subjects to have 10,000 supervised practice trials before thcy could participate in any real experiments.

In the Structuralist view, the contents of the sclf-observations or introspcctions are considered to bc facts or data. From an information proccssing point of view, on the other hand, the fact or datum is that a subject said or reported "X". In thc former interpretation we are obliged to trust that the subject is honest and capable and that the words and the sentenccs are understood in the samc way by the subject and the exprenter.In the later interpretation, it is sufficint to eprodc account for the report or aspects of it.Taking it literally as an observation is just one of many alternativc interpretations.

Another crucial aspect of classical introspection is that in the direct description of the sensory components it wasn't obvious what wcre to be taken as the elementary units of sensation. Much introspective rescarch activity was devoted, therefore, to determining the characteristics of these units. In this kind of analysis the obscrvers madc decisions about which of several proposals for sensory units correctly reportcd direct judgments and cvaluations of hypotheses.This kind of introspcctive analysis is very different from the direct description advocatcd by Titchencr, and was also particularly plagucd by extcnsive disagreements between different laboratories.

Iatencies of cognitive processes wcre considered interesting as a separate source of data on the structurc of thought processes. Donders' proposal, discusscd earlier, for three types of reactions was extended by Wundt. He suggested that the c-rcaction, where the subject gave a fixcd responsc to only a ccrtain typc of stimulus, involvcd not only a discrimination but also a choice of whcther to respond or not. As a consequence of this criticism, Wundt proposed the d-reaction, in which the subjects respond as soon as they have made a cognitive discrimination of the stimulus. As the subjects didn't have to make a choice to respond or not (they always respondcd, as discrimination of a stimulus invariably occurs) this d-reaction would be a pure measure of the time taken to discriminate or to cognize the stimulus.

Issues and Discussion. Titchener's type of introspection was scverely criticized on at least two major counts. The Wuerzburgers and the Gestalt psychologists claimed that many aspccts of consciousness could not bc reduced to sensory and imaginal components, and that, consequently, the mcthod of analytic introspcction was inadequate and should be replaccd with phenomenal reports. In addition, the researchers at Wuerzburg collected phenomenal cvidence rcjccting the assumptions underlying the subtraction mcthod for measuring the duration of cognitive processes.

The bchaviorists with Watson reacted against the dircct observation of consciousness, and claimed thal only observable bchavior could be used as facts or data. Watson pointed out the lack of reproducibility of analytic introspections from different laboratorics (i.c., disagreements on issues like "existencc of imageless thought." "whcther the primary colors are three or four" and "which are the fundamental attributes of visual sensation"). At the same timc hc acknowledgcd the rcliable and robust results obtained by introspection in psychophysics. Thesc two lines of critique suggested other mcthods of study, which wc will consider later. First, wc will discuss why the difficulties with analytic introspection of thought did not prevent rcliablc results from bcing obtained in psychophysical studics. Then wc will review briefly the unsuccessful attempts of the structuralists to mcasure the specd and duration of the basic cognitive processes.

Analytic Introspections. We wish now to describe and rcinterpret in information processing terms the cognitivc processes involved in making analytic introspections and observations of the scnsory and imaginal components of thought. Unfortunatcly, there is very little explicit discussion of these processes by the introspcctionists themselves, and our explication will thercfore bc partly inferred. 'The first phase pcars to be very similar to the processes atitributed to the sensory stores in the human information processing modcl. Classical introspection was aimed at describing the contents of thesc scnsory stores at discrcte time intervals, likc photographic snapshots (to bc intcrpreted gencrally toinclude non-visual sensations and imagery).

Oservation, as wehav aid above, iplis two things: attention to the phenomena, and record of the phenomena. The attention must be held at the highest possible degree of concentration; the record must be photographically accurate.

(Titchener, 1909, p. 24)

From the point of view of atention this means that the subject, if he can, must redircct attention intentionally from the spontaneously emerging thought content of STM to a single scnsory store in order to register rapidly the activc sensory components. l.ct us assume for the moment that this is possible. Each recognized pattern in STM would correspond to a very large number of independent scnsory components, which would all have to bc retaincd in STM or stored in I'TM until they could bc reported. However, storage of information in i.TM with usable rctrieval cues requires considerable timc—cstimatcd at 8 seconds for cach chunk (Simon, 1979)—which would basically excludc the possibility of storage in LTM in this case.

Span of attention was known by contemporary rescarch to be limited to a small number of clements (see Woodworth, 1938). It was possible to retain much more information if familiar patterns or organizations were recognized, yct cncoding in such patterns would violate the notion of a description directly in terms of scnsory and imaginal components. This raises the qucstion of how all thcse sensory components could be registcrcd and then stored awaiting thcir reporting, as reporting is known to take considcrable time.

Strange to say, a ten-sccond pcriod of thinking sometimes required as many minutes to rccount and make clcar to E. (Woodworth, 1938, p. 783)

Evaluating the complcteness, objcctivity, and veridicality of the "psychological description" of thought contents raises scrious mcthodological problems, since thc cxpcrimentcr lacks external control of, and independent access to, thc thought contcnt described. One answcr to the problcm of the bricf availability of thought content is tachistoscopic presentation of visual stimuli. By providing experimental control ovcr the stimuli, this technique allows assessment of the veridicality and accuracy of the "psychological descriptions." In a noted study in 1904, Kuclpc (Chapman, 1932) found that with tachistoscopic presentations of colored letters, an instruction to report certain aspects first (c.g., the colors of the lettcrs) caused a scrious deccrement in the subscquent reportability of other aspccts of the stimulus (e.g., the positions of the letters).

Kuelpe's study doesn't discriminate between incomplcte encoding of the stimuli and decay of memory for the information that wasn't reported immediately. In a later study Chapman (1932) dcmonstrated that informing the subjects about the aspcct to be rcported prior to the tachistoscopic presentation yielded more accurate reports than informing the subjects immcdiately after the stimulus was presentcd. Still more recently, Spcrling (1960) measured thc duration of these initial "iconic" recordings of sensory stimuli, and dcmonstrated that though they endured only a fraction of a sccond, thcir content excceded the capacity of STM. (The units of reporting in Spcrling's studics wcrc not clementary sensory components, but letters or digits.)

Clearly, then, reportability dcpends on what information is heeded, and hence upon the task (Aufgabc). Not only is the capacity for retaining information limited, but ability to rcport it can bc affected by an initial bias to search for particular information.Introspcctive reports are subject to several sorts of sclective bias including the thcorctically based training of observers, the uncontrolled usc of questions (Humphrey, 1951), and the fact that subjects (often faculty and graduate students) are often not naive to the hypotheses addressed in these studics (Comstock, 1921). Taking these possible biases into account, it becomes difficult to accept the reports as scicntifically valid evidencc. In fact, it was proposed in the case of imageless thought that the observers simply overlooked the actual images and kinesthetic scnsations,

...so quick is the process of thought and so completely is the attention of the subject likcly to bc concentrated on meaning. We have a parallel case in thc ncglect of after-images and double images ... in cveryday cxpericncc when other things are in the focus of attention. (Comstock, 1921, p.211)

Psychophysical Judgments. In contrast with the dubiousness of the method of analytic introspection, high rcliability is usually imputed to the results obtaincd from introspective analysis of psychophysical relations. Yet the standard data in psychophysics are introspections. The explanation for the difference is simple; the cxpcrimcntal situation for making psychophysical judgments of scnsory stimuli is very different from the one described abovc. The obscrver is instructcd in advance when to attend and what to attend to; the stimulus is simple and presented over an extended interval of tic.Moreover, the judgments, generally being comparativc, arc reports of highly cncoded stimuli that say nothing about the raw scnsory components. Esscntially, no additional memory is required for the observation before it can be reortn hebs hif, i sot iffiult pcophysiclnins sabe,but eanaly tions.

Latencies. The Structuralists' rescarch on latcncies was criticized on basically the same grounds as was analytic introspection. Some initial rescarch with Wundt's d-rcaction, where the subjects respondcd as soon as thcy had discriminated the stimulus, gave very rcliable cstimates for the times taken to cognizc stimuli. Then a series of studics (scc Woodworth, 1938) showcd the d-rcaction to takc as much time as the simple reaction. Berger (Woodworth, 1938) cxplained thcsc results by pointing out that the response in the d-rcaction is independent of the discrimination, in that thc subject always responds, as in simple reactions. Hence, there is no objective criterion to assure that the subject waits until the stimulus is discriminated beforc responding. In fact, unless the subject is to make his motor response contingent on the result of the discrimination, there seems to be no way to cnsure that the motor response is not initiated earlier and in parallel with the perceptual processcs. Again it appears that subjects were askcd to do an impossible task.

Analyses of latencics were discarded on more gencral grounds whcn evidence was found against Donders' crucial assumption that the stages of discrimination and response selection in the b- and c-rcaction wcre simply inscrted additivcly in thc a-rcaction. Ach and Watt from the Wucrzburg laboratory found from retrospcctivc reports that the proccsses of preparing for these several reactions wcre vcry different in terms of what was attended to prior to the presentation of the stimuli (Woodworth, 1938). Thesc different types of rcactions should thus be scen as wholly distinct procedures, and the differences in duration among thcm could not be used as cstimates of the durations of unique component cognitive processes.

## Watson's Attack on Introspection

Just at a time when the classical introspectionists wcre becoming increasingly sclf-conscious about mcthodological issucs (Titchencr, 1912a, 1912b, 1913), Watson (1913), in thc influential paper "Psychology as the Bchaviorist Vicws it," launchcd a total attack on thc study of consciousness. He criticized the introspcctivc mcthod and its results, and argued that psychology, as a natural sciencc, could do without introspective data and mental constructs.

It is important to note that Watson's (1913) critique is not directed against all uses of verbal reports as data, but spccifically against the analytic methods and results of the classical introspectionists. When he points to the lack of rcproducibility of analytic introspcctions from different laboratories, he refers to the issuc of "imagcless thought," "whcthcr the primary colors are thrce or four" and "which the fundamental attributes of visual sensations are." Watson is even more disturbed that laboratories try to discredit opposing cvidence by attributing it to lack of training of the observers in the compcting laboratories.

Although Watson did not mention Comstock's (1921) objection that the observers wcre not, in general, naive to the hypothescs under study, he did stress the additional problem of communicating mcaning. How can we be sure that the introspccting observer uses language in the same way as the interpreting experimenter? Espccially whcn an observer is lcarning new distinctions of consciousness without any feedback or objective control, therc is a problem of cnsuring common reference between observer and experimenter. Watson (1920) argues, with evidence, that theintrospective verbal report is untrustworthy for scientifc pur poses.

After having made as searching analysis as we like upon several players' playing of golf, what will be lcft out of the individuals' own accounts? Again suppose we takc down their overt responses to any questions wc may ask and incorporate them into our record. They are of rclativcly little value. No one since objective studics upon golf have been made trusts the verbal report of a golf player. He will tell you that he never takes his eyes off the ball whcn making a stroke. The camera shows that  s  prevaricator.atson,  . 100-101)

It should be noted that the kind of questioning illustrated by this examplc docs not refer to the subject's memory of a specific instance, but to how he thinks he performs activitics in general when hc is asked about them. Watson made a clcar distinction betwcen analytic classical introspection, verbal questioning of a subjcct, and thinking aloud. His views on theicality lattr kind l ort w qui difnt from his views on the first two. In fact, of coursc, his view was that thinking consisted primarily of subvocal spccch (Watson, 1924), and to iv ienc pWtdmatha can be made overt.

The present writer has often fclt that a good deal more can be leane about the sychology thikig by making subjects think aloud about definite problems, than by trustng to the unscientific method of introspection. (Watson, 1920, p.91)

After prescnting the first documented analysis of thinking-aloud activity, Watson (1920) summarizes his arguments for the opinion just quoted —that the overt verbalizations in TA correspond to the normally covert thought activity—by making referencc to observations from numerous individuals thinking aloud whilc working problems. Watson was quite clcar about distinctions among modes of verbalization that have since become muddled. Thesc distinctions wcre also quite apparent to the Gestalt successors of classical introspectionism. In their phcnomenological obscrvations, naive subjccts wcre uscd, and the subjects were allowed to give thcir own spontancous descriptions in their own language.

The behaviorists' suspicion of verbal reports was rcinforced by their emphasis upon overt performance rather than mediating processes. Even if introspective information was not necessarily incorrect and uninformative, it was unnecessary and could be rcplaced by appropriate behavioral mcasures (Watson, 1913). With this point of view, questions of the adequacy and validity of vcrbal reports, and of methods for obtaining them, were simply irrelevant. It is not surprising, therefore, that this methodology was not studied cxtensively.

## Later Views

When Woodworth (1938), twenty years later, discussed verbal reports, he emphasized the distinction betwcen describing thoughts and cxpressing them. In response to Titchener's notion of cxcluding meaning from reports, he presentcd a case for a more dircct and natural reference to complete thoughts (Woodworth, 1938, p. 785):

Even though reference to the object is a very incomplete description of a particular instant of cxpcricnce, a series of such statements does describc the general course of a thinking proccss—just as naming thc towns through which you have driven maps the route you have takcn. If O reports "I thought of A, and B, of C, noticcd that I was drifting away from the problem and went back to A," he gives a picture of the coursc of his thinking (Selz, 1913).

And as a more concrcte illustration of the type of verbal report he had in mind, he gavc (Woodworth, 1938, p. 786) the following cxample from Binet (1903, p. 14):

I thought of the pump in the garden which someone was operating and said to mysclf that it must be the cook, then I heard a rooster crow and thought of this rooster.

I asked myself whether Polly would be willing to lend me her bike so that Marge could take mine to ride with us to Fontainebleau.

Note that this immediate retrospective rcport of thoughts has many of the same attributes as the phenomenological description that followed classical introspection-whcrc untraincd and naivc subjects verbalize thcir immediate impressions. 'Ihis view of immediatc rctrospective reports as something quite distinct from classical introspective analysis scemcd, through the subscquent ycars, to have fadcd away, so that verbal reports camc to be viewcd, without distinction or discrimination, as somcthing inadmissible.

In the rclativcly small number of studics sincc the advent of behaviorism that sytematically collected vcrbal reports, the following criticisms were either raiscd or investigatcd cmpirically: (a) Verbal reports arc incomplctc, and important bchavioral and pcrformance changes are not reflected in them (Greenspoon, 1955; Recs and Israel, 1935); (b) The instruction to give verbal rcports and/or thcir production changcs thc cognitive processes under study (Phclan, 1965); (c) The verbal reports are inconsistent with other observable aspects of behavior (Vcrplanck, 1962); (d) Thc verbal rcports arc unrcliablc and idiosyncratic, and they do not carry any information that is generalizable or that can further our understanding of performance (Nisbett & Wilson, 177). We have alrcady seen that many of these criticisms are either unsupported or overgeneralized.

Thinking aloud has many fcatures in common with the phenomenological observation that succcedcd classical introspection. Insd analy s n the sation roin the new mcthods sougt for a direct expression of the thoughts.

While the introspecter makes himself as thinking the object of his attention, the subject who is thinking aloud remains immediatcly directcd to the problem, so to spcak allowing his activity to become verbal. When somcone, while thinking sys ohief, "O ught to eif this is'—" "It would be nice if onc could show that—," one would hardly call this introspection. (Duncker, 1945)

By having the sbjcts vebaliz their thoughts at the tme they emerged, thediffiultian sourcs rrorassociated with ki thoughts in memory or retrieving them from memory could be climinated (Claparède, 1934). With a TA instruction, naive and inexperienced subjects could bc used, since the subjects were asked simply to express their thoughts, a skill which, it was thought, should bc part of every subject's normal repertoire.

Several investigators (Bulbrook, 1932: Claparèdc, 1934; Duncker, 1926; Smoke, 1932; Watson, 1920) started more or less independently to ask subjects to "think aloud" or "talk aloud." This mcthod did not produce a rcal brcakthrough until thc verbalized information could be given cxplicit mcaning in terms of a formal model of thc thought processes that could bc simulated on a computer (Ncwcll, Shaw, & Simon, 1958).

These newer mcthods of inducing subjects to give vcrbal reports have also been criticized frequently. One of thc main criticisms is that giving verbalizations concurrently with thc cognitivc processcs, or even knowing that one is to give retrospcctive rcports after thc cxperiment, changes the performance and hence the cognitive processes studied. This criticism will be referred to as the effect-of-verbalization argument. A second criticism, called the incompleteness argument, is that the subject may fail to verbalize a considerable part of the information that passes through his STM, or that he uscs in the task he is performing. In this case, the TA protocol will fail to track the actual path of the activity, as revealed by other observations or inferred from thcory. This criticism applies also to the cases, primarily in retrospectivc vcrbalization, where subjects, for lack of knowledge or memory of thc activity, refrain from giving a full verbal report. A third criticism, which wc will call the epiphenomenality or irrelevance argument, is that the verbalizations may report an activity that occurs in parallel with, but indcpendent of, the actual thought process, hence provides no rcliable information about the latter. Putting all these criticisms together, they amount to the accusation that the TA procedure changes subjects' thought processes, givcs only an incomplete rcport of them, and mainly reports information that is independent of, hence irrelevant to, the actual mcchanisms of thinking.

## SUMMARY AND PROSPECT

In this introductory chapter, we have sct forth the hypothesis that verbal behavior is to be accounted for in the same way as any other behavior, that is, by devcloping and testing an information-processing model of
