> 来源：The lettered city (Rama, Angel, Chasteen, John Charles, 1955-)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The lettered city (Rama, Angel, Chasteen, John Charles, 1955-)\The lettered city (Rama, Angel, Chasteen, John Charles, 1955-).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 2 The Ordered City

activity."6 The imposition of these ideas in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries corresponds to that crucial moment in Western culture when, as Michel Foucault has sagaciously perceived, words began to separate from things, and people's understanding of epistemology changed from one of triadic conjuncture to the binary relationship expressed in the Logique of Port Royal, published in 1662, theorizing the independence of the "order of signs."7 The cities of Spanish America, the societies that were to inhabit them, and the "lettered" interpreters of them developed together in a time when signs became no longer "direct representations of the world, linked to it by secret, solid ties of likeness or affnity with what they represent," and began instead "to signify from within a body of knowledge" and "to take from it their probability or certainty."8

From that flow of knowledge sprang forth the ideal cities of the Iberian empires' American vastness. Their ordering principle revealed itself as a hierarchical society transposed by analogy into a hierarchical design of urban space. It was not the real society that was transposed, of course, but its organized form, and not into the fabric of the living city, but merely into its ideal layout, so that in the geometrical distribution we can read the social morphology of the planners. This conversion was made possible by the advancing project of rationalization. The untrammeled rationalizing urge demanded similar flexibility in the order of signs. Rationalization also required a concentration of power to implement the directives of the rationalizers. That power was already visibly temporal and human, although it cloaked and legitimated itself ideologically in celestial absolutes, as power will do. Such legitimation had long been provided by religion, but when the religious masks of power were shattered, stately secular ideologies soon substituted them. In a like manner, efforts to legitimate existing power relations have always been the great source of new ideologies.

The lexical key to the entire imperial system was the Janus-faced word order, symptomatically ambiguous in grammatical gender (el orden or la orden), a concept pursued equally by the church, the army, and the administrative bureaucracy of the Iberian empires. According to the received definitions of the day, order meant: "putting things in their places; concert and harmonious disposition among things; the rule or mode to be observed in producing things." Pursuit of order lay at the heart of the systems of classification (like natural history, architecture, and geometry) that then loomed so large in the corpus of knowledge. The word order recurs obsessively in the instructions imparted in 1513 by the king, or rather by his council of advisers, to Pedrarias Dávila, leader of a Spanish expedition that pushed beyond the conquistadors' original foothold in the Caribbean once accommodation to the New World environment had readied them for further violent expansion and colonization. It is worthy of emphasis, though hardly surprising, that the instructions framed the entire enterprise in terms of Spanish colonial interests, establishing from the very first a coastal orientation and a string of port cities that would, centuries later, undermine attempts at national integration in not a few independent states. Point number seven of the instructions fixed the following guidelines for cities to be founded on the new continent:

Having ascertained what things are necessary for the settlements and having chosen the site most advantageous and abundantly provided with allthings necessary to those who will setle therein, distribute town lots for the construction of houses, in orderly fashion, according to the quality of the recipients, s that,once cucte theown w per wellas ears thespace ea the central plaza, the location of the church, and the placement of the streets; because where such orders are given from the outset, orderly results will follow without undue cost and effort, and in other places order will never be achieved.9

Thus, beyond the immediate needs of urban planning, rationalized cities reflected a vision of the future. The transference of an idealized social order into the physical reality of the newly founded cit required the previus cultural laboatio oatalizinmbolic languages. The royal directives sought quite explicitly to program eventual social development in accord with the vision of the ratinalizers, and they wereaided in this endeavorby the period'smost abstract symbolic language: mathematics. The methods of analytical geometry had recently been extended to all areas of human endeavor by Descartes, who regarded them as the only valid—unerring and uncontaminated — tools of reason.

When applied to urban planning in Spanish America, the result was the ubiquitous checkerboard grid that has endured practically until the present day. Other geometric designs might have affected the same transference of social ideal into urban reality. Circular plans constituted a frequent option in Renaissance thinking, derived from the teaching of Vitruvio and visible in the works of León Batista Alberti, Jacopo Barozzi Vignola, Antonio Arvelino Filareta, and Andrea Pallacio, among others.10 The circular layout responded to the same regulating principles as the checkerboard: unity, planning, and rigorous order reflecting a social hierarchy. Circular plans perhaps conveyed even more precisely than square ones the social hierarchy desired by the planners, with governing authority located at the center and the living spaces assigned to respective social strata radiating from the center in concentric circles. Both designs were simply variations of the same conception, in which the application of reason imposed a specific order on social reality through the engineer's "taut line and rule," as the royal instructions to the advancing conquerors frequently specified verbatim.

As Michel Foucault observed, "what made the classical episteme possible as a whole, of course, was its relationship to a knowledge of order."11 In the case of cities, that indispensable knowledge resulted in the principle of urban planning. The Enlightenment, that epoch of faith in rational operations, further strengthened and institutionalized the planning impulse, and concern over the outcomes of urban planning elicited spirited commentary on its designs, its procedures, and above all, its guiding philosophies.12

More important than the much-discussed grid design are the general principles behind it, directing a whole series of transmitted directives (from Spain to America, from the governing head to the physical body of the city) so that the distribution of urban space would reproduce and confirm the desired social order. But even more important is the principle postulated in the quoted directives of the king: before anything may be built, the city must be imagined in order to avoid circumstances that might interfere with its ordained norms. The notion that statutory order must be constituted at the outset to prevent future disorder alludes to the peculiar virtue of signs: to remain unalterable despite the passage of time and, at least hypothetically, to constrain changing reality in a changeless rational framework. Operating on these principles, the Iberian empires established rigid procedures for founding new cites and then extended them methodically across vast stretches of time and space.

Before their appearance as material entities, cities had to be constructed as symbolic representations. Therefore, the permanence of the whole depended on the immutability of the signs themselves on the words that transmitted the will to build the city in accordance with the stipulated norms — and also on the diagrams that translated the will into graphic terms. Without drawn plans the mental image created by the written directives was more likely to suffer permutations owing to local conditions or to inexpert execution. Thinking the city was the function of these symbolic systems, and their growing autonomy suited them increasingly to the manipulations of absolute authority.

The conquerors still asserted territorial claims through rituals impregnated with magic, but now they required a writer of some sort (a scribe, a notary, a chronicler) to cast their foundational acts in the form o imperishable gs.Theresultin sripturehad the h function reserved to notarial documents, which according to the Spanish formula, give witness or "faith" to the acts they record. The prestige that could only derive from the written word thus began its portentous imperial career on the American continent.

In Latin America, the written word became the only binding one-in contradistinction to the spoken word, which belonged to the realmof things precarious and uncertai. It even seemed plausible that (contrary to Saussure) spoken language derived from writte lngue ther tan ic er. Wri bast pe, a kind of autonomy from the material world, that imitated eternity and appeared efom tesitde ndmetamorphose  ity.
