> 来源：Plans and situated actions the problem of human-machine communication (Suchman, Lucille Alice)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Plans and situated actions the problem of human-machine communication (Suchman, Lucille Alice)\Plans and situated actions the problem of human-machine communication (Suchman, Lucille Alice).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# 1 Introduction

The famous anthropological absorption with the (to us) exotic ...is, thus, essentially a device for displacn the dulling sense of familiarity with which the mysteriousness of our own ability to relate perceptively to one another is concealed from us.

(Geertz 1973, p. 14)

The problem of shared understanding, or mutual intelligibility, has defined the field of social studies for the past hundred years. On the one hand, interpreting the actions of others has been the social scientist's task; to come up with accounts of the significance of human actions is, after all, the principal charge of ethnographic anthropology. On the other hand, to understand the mutual intelligibility of action as a mundane, practical accomplishment of members of the society is, in large measure, the social scientist's problem or subject matter. An account of that accomplishment would constitute an account of the foundation of social order.

While studies of mutual intelligibility have been concerned exclusively with human action, we now have a technology that has brought with it the idea that rather than just using machines, we interact with them as well. Already, the notion of "humanmachine interaction'' pervades both technical and popular discussion of computers, whether about their design or their use. In the debate over specific problems in the design and use of interactive machines, however, no question is raised about the bases for the very idea of human-machine interaction as such. And recent developments in the social sciences regarding the foundations of human interaction have had remarkably little influence on the discussion of interactive machines.

The following chapters examine the conception of purposeful action, and consequently of interaction, informing the design of interactive machines. My central concern in the investigation is a new manifestation of an old problem in the study of mutual intelligibility: namely, the relation between observable behavior and the processes, not available to direct observation, that make behavior meaningful. For psychological studies, the crucial processes are essentially cognitive, located inside the head of the actor, and include the formation and effect of beliefs, desires, intentions, and the like. For social studies, the crucial processes are interactional and circumstantial, located in the relationships among actors, and between actors and their embedding situations. In either case, the problem of meaningful action turns on the observation that behavior is inherently subject to indefinitely many ascriptions of meaning or intent, while meaning and intent are expressible through an indefinite number of possible behaviors. Whether the final arbiter of action's significance is taken to be private psychological processes, or accountability to the public world, the question to be resolved - what constitutes purposeful action and how is it understood  is the same.

The new manifestation of this question concerning the nature of purposeful action and its interpretation arises in research on machine intelligence. Theoretically, the goal of that research is a computational model of intelligent behavior that not only, given some input, produces the right output behavior, but that does so by sulatiuan cgnitiv pros. Pracically, the al machine that, given some input, produces behavior that is useful and appropriate to the situation at hand. In either case, insofar as rightness or appropriateness of behavior means that behavior is accountably rational in the eyes of an other, the measure of success is at bottom an interactional one.

For the moment, at least, the question of theoretical versus practical criteria of adequacy for machine intelligence is rendered moot

## Introduction

by the problems involved in constructing a device that even appears to behave in ways that are purposeful or intelligent, at least outside of the most highly constrained domains. It may simply turn out that the resistance of meaningful action to simulation in the absence of any deep understanding will defend us against false impressions of theoretical success. In any case, my purpose here is not to resolve the question of whether or not artificial intelligence is possible, but rather to clarify some existing troubles in the project of constructing intelligent, interactive machines, as a way of contributing to our understanding of human intelligence and interaction.

Every human tool relies upon, and reifies, some underlying conception of the activity that it is designed to support. As a consequence, one way to view the artifact is as a test on the limits of the underlying conception. In this book I examine an artifact built on a planning model of human action. The model treats a plan as something located in the actor's head, which directs his or her behavior. In contrast, I argue that artifacts built on the planning model confuse plans with situated actions, and recommend instead a view of plans as formulations of antecedent conditions and consequences of action that account for action in a plausible way. As ways of talking about action, plans as such neither determine the actual course of situated action nor adequately reconstruct it. While for purposes of practical action this limitation on plans is irrelevant, for purposes of a science of practical action it is crucial. Specifically, if we are interested in situated action itself, we need to look at how it is that actors use the resources that a particular occasion provides  including, but crucially not reducible to, formulations such as plans  to construct their action's developing purpose and intelligibility.

Beginning with a view of interaction, or communication - I shall use the two terms interchangeably  as the mutual intelligibility of action, I investigate the basis for beginning to speak of interaction between humans and machines. Chapter 2 introduces the notion of interactive artifacts, and its basis in certain properties of computing machines. Chapter 3 examines the view of plans as the basis for action and communication held by designers of artificially intelli-

## Introduction

gent, interactive machines, while chapters 4 and 5 present the alternative view of action and communication as situated, drawn from recent developments in social science. Finally, chapters 6 and 7 offer an analysis of encounters between novice users of a machine and a computer-based system intended to be intelligent and interactive. The aim of the case study is not to criticize the particular design, but to view the design as reifying certain premises about purposeful action. The task is to articulate those premises, to see how they succeed as a basis for human-machine communication and how they fail, and to explore the implications of their success and failure both for the design of human-machine communication and for the general explication of purposeful action and mutual intelligibility.
