> 来源：The Waste Makers (Vance Packard)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Waste Makers (Vance Packard)\The Waste Makers (Vance Packard).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# CHAPTER 1

# City of the Future?

WHAT WILL THE WORLD OF TOMORROW BE LIKE? IN THE COURSE OF this book we shall examine a number of probabilities based on projections of current trends. Spokesmen for industry like to speculate about tomorrow even more than the rest of us. They invite us to peer out onto the horizon and see the wondrous products their marketing experts are conceiving for us. We are encouraged to share their dreams and to tingle at the possibility of using voice writers, wall-sized television screens, and motorcars that glide along highways under remote control.

Most of these marketing experts, despite their air of chronic excited optimism, are grappling with a problem that would frighten the wits out of less resolute people. That problem is the specter of glut for the products they are already endeavoring to sell.

If we could probe the real dreams of these marketing people as they slumber restlessly at night, we would find—when a smile finally settles on their faces—that they are not dreaming merely of more bewitching products to sell to us. More likely, they are dreaming that they are in their private world of the future, where selling has again become easy because the haunting problem of saturation has been vanquished. This Utopia might be called Cornucopia City, and its setting is out on the misty horizon of time.

In Cornucopia City, as I understand it, all the buildings will be made of a special papier-mâché. These houses can be torn down and rebuilt every spring and fall at housecleaning time. The motorcars of Cornucopia will be made of a lightweight plastic that develops fatigue and begins to melt if driven more than four thousand miles. Owners who turn in their old motorcars at the regular turn-in dates—New Year's, Easter, Independence Day, and Labor Day—will be rewarded with a one-hundred-dollar United States Prosperity-Through-Growth Bond for each motorcar turned in. And a special additional bond will be awarded to those families able to turn in four or more motorcars at each disposal date.

One fourth of the factories of Cornucopia City will be located on the edge of a cliff, and the ends of their assembly lines can be swung to the front or rear doors depending upon the public demand for the product being produced. When demand is slack, the end of the assembly line will be swung to the rear door and the output of refrigerators or other products will drop out of sight and go directly to their graveyard without first overwhelming the consumer market.

Every Monday, the people of Cornucopia City will stage a gala launching of a rocket into outer space at the local Air Force base. This is another of their contributions to national prosperity. Components for the rockets will have been made by eighteen subcontractors and prime contractors in the area. One officially stated objective of the space probing will be to report to the earth people what the back side of Neptune's moon looks like.

Wednesday will be Navy Day. The Navy will send a surplus warship to the city dock. It will be filled with surplus play-suits, cake mix, vacuum cleaners, and trampolines that have been stockpiled at the local United States Department of Commerce complex of warehouses for surplus products. The ship will go thirty miles out to sea, where the crew will sink it from a safe distance.

As we peek in on this Cornucopia City of the future, we learn that the big, heartening news of the week is that the Guild of Appliance Repair Artists has passed a resolution declaring it unpatriotic for any member even to look inside an ailing appliance that is more than two years old.

The heart of Cornucopia City will be occupied by a titanic pushbutton super mart built to simulate a fairyland. This is where all the people spend many happy hours a week strolling and buying to their heart's content. In this paradise of high-velocity selling, there are no jangling cash registers to disrupt the holiday mood. Instead, the shopping couples—with their five children trailing behind, each pushing his own shopping cart—gaily wave their lifetime electronic credit cards in front of a recording eye. Each child has his own card, which was issued to him at birth.

Conveniently located throughout the mart are receptacles where the people can dispose of the old-fashioned products they bought on a previous shopping trip. In the jewelry section, for example, a playfully designed sign by a receptacle reads: "Throw your old watches here!" Cornucopia City's marvelous mart is open around the clock, Sundays included. For the Sunday shoppers who had developed a churchgoing habit in earlier years, there is a little chapel available for meditation in one of the side alcoves.

Is Cornucopia City to become not a feverish dream, but, instead, an extreme prototype for the City of Tomorrow?

Certainly in the next twenty years the broad outlines of Cornucopia City will come to seem less and less fanciful, if current trends continue. Already a chapel has been built in a shopping center outside Miami. Already the General Dynamics Corporation has under development a lifetime electronic credit card. Already watches are being sold as fashion accessory items. Already paper houses are being marketed. Already the life expectancy of motorcars has been showing a notable drop. Already supermarkets are staying open around the clock in many areas, with push-button markets under development. Already the stockpiling and disposing of subsidized but unwanted agricultural products have become a world-wide scandal. Already some home furnishings are being built to break down within a few years, and product makers have been showing a disconcerting fascination with the idea of setting "death dates" for products.

And, finally, already the pressures to expand production and consumption have forced Americans to create a hyperthyroid economy that can be sustained only by constant stimulation of the people and their leaders to be more prodigal with the nation's resources.

This presents us with another specter, one so disconcerting that Americans have thus far chosen to suppress awareness of it. That is the dangerous decline in the United States of its supply of essential resources. Once fabulously rich in these, the United States is now a have-not nation and is becoming more so every month. United States industrial firms are grinding up more than half of the natural resources processed each year on this planet for the benefit of 6 per cent of the

planet's people. In the lifetime of many, if not most, of us, Americans will be trying to "mine" old forgotten garbage dumps for their rusted tin cans.

The people of the United States are in a sense becoming a nation on a tiger. They must learn to consume more and more or, they are warned, their magnificent economic machine may turn and devour them. They must be induced to step up their individual consumption higher and higher, whether they have any pressing need for the goods or not. Their ever-expanding economy demands it.

If modifications are forced upon the private-enterprise system of the United States in the future, it will be because that system did too good a job of filling many of the needs of the people. Defeat on such terms, we should all agree, would be saddening.

Man throughout recorded history has struggled—often against appalling odds—to cope with material scarcity. Today, there has been a massive break-through. The great challenge in the United States—and soon in Western Europe—is to cope with a threatened overabundance of the staples and amenities and frills of life. Conceivably, even the longimpoverished and slower-starting Soviet Union may someday find itself trying to deal with an overflowing of goods. The United States, however, already is finding that the challenge of coping with its fabulous productivity is becoming a major national problem and is inspiring some ingenious responses and some disquieting changes. This book will deal with the systematic efforts being made to encourage citizens to be more careless and extravagant with their nation's resources, and what these efforts imply.

When I refer to the waste makers at large in the land, I refer primarily to those who are seeking to make their fellow citizens more prodigal in their daily lives. In a broader sense, however, it could be asserted that most Americans are becoming waste makers. If I can help it, there will be no villains in this book. A charge of rape cannot be sustained by any adult when consent or co-operation has been given. Prodigality is the spirit of the era. Historians, I suspect, may allude to this as the Throwaway Age.

Further—and let's face it—a good many Americans and Europeans have a pretty direct stake in the failure or success of businessmen in inducing us all to be more wasteful. The wife of a supermarket operator, the engineer working for an appliance company, the schoolteacher who owns a few shares of stock in a motorcar company—all these kindly people may feel uneasy about the wastefulness they see, and yet they have a vested interest in its accelerated perpetuation. And the professional marketer whose efforts to induce prodigality they may deplore is simply the trained expert employed to work on behalf of the firms that contribute to their own support.

While our focus will be on the wastefulness being promoted by United States industry in order to sell its ever-mounting stockpiles of products, we should recognize that wastefulness has become a part of the American way of life. The landscape of the globe is becoming strewn with armaments and other materiel abandoned by employees of the United States government. A spokesman for the United States Army Ordnance Corps acknowledged in 1960 that the Army had goofed in losing track of a million dollars' worth of motorcycle parts squirreled away in a Georgia warehouse. When they were found after fifteen years, the parts had become worthless except for scrap. And it was

disclosed that the Navy had been paying \$21 for lamp sockets selling for 25 cents in retail stores.

And many labor practices, too, have become a part of this pattern of wallowing in waste. Many workingmen today show more concern for feather-bedding, gold-bricking, getting onto their boats, or collecting their "rocking chair" compensations, than they do for developing a standard of workmanship for themselves that is worthy of pride. They want their tri-level house in the suburbs but often aren't willing to put in a decent performance to earn it.

In a restaurant in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, I overheard a businessman, with tears in his eyes, tell his wife he had decided to abandon his business because his employees were goofing off so badly that he could not get a decent day's work out of them.

But all these forms of wastefulness in American life seem to stem in large part from the fantastic productivity of the nation's mechanized, often automated offices, factories, and farms. That productivity is the central fact. And its impact is seen most conspicuously in the efforts of United States business to cope with it by promoting ever-higher levels of private consumption and a philosophy of waste.

Where are we drifting under the pressures to make us more wasteful, imprudent, and carefree in our consuming habits? What is the impact of all this pressure toward wastefulness on the United States and on the behavior and character of its people? These, I think, are momentous questions. Let us explore them with all the compassion and forbearance we can muster.

CHAPTER 2

# The Nagging Prospects of Saturation

"Marketing men across America are facing a fact that is hard for them to swallow. America's capacity to produce may have outstripped its capacity to consume."—ERNEST DALE, Graduate School of Business and Public Administration, Cornell University.

TODAY, THE AVERAGE CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES IS CONSUMING twice as much in the way of goods as the average citizen consumed in the years just before World War II. Nearly two fifths of the things he owns are things that are not essential to his physical wellbeing. They are optional or luxury items. And there are signs that physical possessions are becoming too plentiful to accommodate comfortably. Visiting foreigners comment that the abundance of America seems to spill over into the aisles of stores, spread along the highways, and bulge out the doors, windows, and attics of houses. There is this general evidence of profusion of material wealth even though there is a substantial residue, numbering millions of families, that remains unquestionably ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed. And the television set may be substituting for adequate food in the family budget.

In a good-humored forecast of things to come, the senior editor of Sales Management asserted on May 6, 1960: "If we Americans are to buy and consume everything that automated manufacture, sock-o selling and all-out advertising can thrust upon us, each of our mounting millions must have extra ears and eyes and other senses—as well as extra income. Indeed, the only sure way to meet all the demands may be to create a brand new breed of super customers."

Consumption must rise, and keep rising. Some marketing experts have been announcing that the average citizen will have to step up his buying by nearly 50 per cent in the next dozen years, or the economy will sicken. In a mere decade, advertising men assert, United States citizens will have to improve their level of consumption as much as their forebears had managed to do in the two hundred years from Colonial times to 1939.

The recent exhortations for greater consumption have been inspired by bulging inventories of goods, which in turn are caused primarily by two factors. One is the ever-growing efficiency of the United States productive force, thanks in large part to the introduction of automated equipment in the offices and factories of nearly a hundred thousand United States companies. During the postwar years, the amount of goods and services that one man can turn out in an hour has increased about 3 per cent every year. This increased output can be absorbed if each citizen consumes more, or if there are, each year, more citizens. Otherwise, there will be less work.

The other factor is the great expansion of United States productive facilities based on the conviction in executive suites that the public can be induced to consume more each year. In 1959, the advertising and marketing journal, Printers' Ink, asserted: "Our automobile plants could turn out eight million cars this year if they dared." But it said the industry would be lucky to sell about half that number. And it added that several other major industries were facing the same "dilemma." Labor leader Walter Reuther complained that in four years the United States had "lost" nearly one hundred billion dollars' worth of potential output because of "under-utilization" of its productive capacity.

Much of the postwar boom in sales has come from supplying products that were badly wanted, if not badly needed. But after a dozen years the specter of satiation is rising to challenge the sellers of many products. A true salesman rejects the concept that a market can ever be satiated; but even the salesmen are beginning to admit that much of the urgency is going out of the demand for their products. Sales Management conceded: "The American consumer has been surfeited with all kinds of wonderful products since the end of the war. He's probably tired, a little jaded, eager for something different."

Today, about nine out of ten American homes contain at least one refrigerator, one television set, and one electric or gas stove. And seven out of ten have a vacuum cleaner, an electric toaster, and an electric food mixer. There are more passenger cars in the land than there are families.

If you are a producer and most families already own your product, you are left with three possibilities for making further sales. You sell replacements; you sell more than one item to each family; or you dream up a new or improved product—or one that at least seems new or improved—that will enchant families that already own an "old" model of your product. (A fourth possibility is to move into a different line.)

The challenge of finding significant improvements that can be made in existing products, however, is becoming more difficult each year. How much more can a toaster or sofa or carpet sweeper or sewing machine be improved, really?

When the Appliance Technical Conference was held in Chicago in 1958, the vice-president of engineering for Whirlpool Corporation made a notably candid statement. He said: "The industry has wrung the last possible ounce of research out of the present appliance products. We can only offer prettier equipment." He urged the industry to start basic research in the properties of clothing and meats in order to come up with radically new products.

All this is not to suggest that genuine technological improvements are not being made—or in prospect of being made—in some products. The push-button and long-distance dialing telephone and the jet passenger airplane are improvements that have produced considerable enchantment among consumers. There is the probability that Americans soon will be offered improvements in home products that will produce a degree of enchantment in some circles: refrigerators with no moving parts, ultrasonic dishwashers that reportedly will remove fried egg from plates, remote-control stoves, lighting based on electroluminescent phosphors for ceiling or wall panels.

But how much should we rejoice when a company introduces a toaster with nine buttons, which make it possible to obtain a piece of toast in any of nine shades? How much should we rejoice when another company introduces a mechanical martini-stirring spoon, which relieves the person stirring from the labor of twisting his wrist? And what American housewife is dreaming of the day when she can prepare

breakfast by simply flicking a bedside switch, which will turn on an electronic recipe maker coded on punch cards?

A columnist for Advertising Age, the forthright E. B. Weiss, took note of the general drying up of spectacular product improvements when he wrote: "Certainly when one compares the 1959 models of autos and major appliances and TV sets with the 1956 models, one must be compelled to wonder whatever happened to the great scientific improvements that must have been the result of hundreds of millions spent by these manufacturers over this period in research work of every kind." A year earlier, Mr. Weiss complained that much of the product improvement "has tended increasingly toward small details of trim, as in the case of the upswept rear fins on cars of late vintage, and toward gimmicky gadgets of little true importance." The changes that were being wrought in the laboratories frequently were simply superficial changes and improvements that could be used as selling points by copy writers.

Whenever engineers in the appliance industry assembled at conferences in the late fifties, they frequently voiced the lament that they had become little more than push buttons for the sales department.

It should also be noted that much of the straining to bring out new products was inspired to a very large extent by a desire on the part of producers to gain more shelf space in the supermarket jungle. Consumer Reports, which is issued by Consumers Union, explained the strategy in this way: "A good deal of what is called product research today actually is a sales promotion expenditure undertaken to provide what the trade calls a profitable 'product mix.' A judicious product mix is, among other things, a combination of brands designed to commandeer for the advertiser the greatest possible shelf space in the supermarket." The result was often a multiplication of brands. A single soap company thus might have three liquid detergents competing with one another. Frequently the so-called new product was simply a new packaging concept. A professor of pharmacology at the University of California charged that much of the publicized money going into the research of new drugs was actually being spent in a quest for patentable variations on things that were already selling well.

During this same period, Americans were seeing a similar slowdown in the unveiling of brand-new kinds of products. At a time when appliance dealers were pleading for something new and exciting to stir public interest, Home Furnishings Daily reported: "Major advances in existing appliances and introduction of completely new appliances cannot be expected for at least several years."

When Fortune magazine reviewed the fifties for its readers from business management, it stated that in consumer goods "the fifties held few surprises." Among the few significant new products it could think of were tranquilizing pills. And it could point to such notable improvements on existing products as power steering, power brakes in motorcars, and stereophonic sound in phonographs. But these, it conceded, "were relatively modest accomplishments, from a technical point of view." It stated that during the fifties the makers of consumer products had not brought forth "a single innovation comparable to the automobile (which became commercially important at about 1910), the radio (early twenties), the mechanical refrigerator (mid-twenties), the automatic washing machine (late thirties), home air conditioning and television (late forties)."

Furthermore, it said that no product of impact comparable with the automobile, radio, television, etc., was in sight for the sixties. Fortune professed to find it somehow comforting that business had learned how to increase sales year after year when it had little significantly new to offer the public. Writer Roger Burlingame also previewed the sixties and reported he could see nothing at the moment that was basically new in products for the use of the common man. The exciting advances were being made in such fields as preparation for space travel.

The growing dependence of the United States economy upon programs financed by the federal government that might in a more sane day be abolished also has created apprehension among those concerned about the future of the economy. Several billion dollars are being spent each year to encourage fanners to raise crops the country does not want or need. Farmers happily pour fertilizer in record-breaking carloads into soil that should be resting. Billions of bushels of the resulting crops are moved into government-built storage bins, costing billions of dollars, made from millions of tons of metal that is scarce in the United States. Some have called the program plain corruption. And Max Moxley, farm editor in Sterling, Kansas, complained, "Our farm prosperity is entirely artificial. There's surplus grain piled everywhere you look. It rather takes away the joy of a good harvest for me. I'm sure the whole folly will come falling down around our ears—and soon, perhaps."

Even more massive and crucial in terms of its stimulus to the United States economy has been the defense spending, which has reached nearly fifty billion dollars a year—or a tenth of the nation's entire output of goods and services. Many United States senators find themselves under strong pressure to protect big aircraft and missile contracts, Naval installations, and Army bases in their states. Any cutbacks would throw some constituents out of jobs, and hit some of their local industries. In 1959, when stock-market prices dipped briefly after President Eisenhower announced that he was meeting with Russian Premier Khrushchev, some financial analysts reported the dip was caused by "peace jitters" among the traders. Financial columnist Sylvia Porter noted that every time there has been a suggestion of a major cut in Pentagon spending "the stock market has gone into a tail spin." On the other hand, in May, 1960, when the Russian capture of the U-2 plane was followed by the collapse of the summit meeting, Wall Street stockmarket prices advanced during seven successive days. The Russians, too, apparently had been having internal trouble because of the "peace scare." Various accounts of the turn to greater belligerence on the part of the Soviet Union cited as influential the lobbying of two hundred and fifty thousand Soviet officers who were scheduled, under disarmament plans, to be demobilized. They reportedly did not relish the prospects of going into civilian jobs as rank-and-file comrades.

The recession in the late fifties served as a sharp reminder to many of the developing dilemma posed by the need for ever-greater production. Recessions were nothing new. But this one was the most severe of the three postwar recessions. In many industries, companies found themselves with heavy inventories of goods and began cutting back production. The public was still buying, but not fast enough. A bewildered advertising executive was reported complaining that up until the last few months Americans had been the most desiring people in the world. As unemployment became a worrisome problem, a marketing journal warned that the unemployed worker produces nothing that can be advertised and sold, and he consumes little beyond necessities.

Marketers reacted to the challenge of coping with mounting glut during the recession by shifting to the really hard sell. In Flint, Michigan, sales executives began firing a cannon every time a motorcar was sold. Citizens across the land were admonished by industrialists and government leaders of all stripes to begin buying for their own good. At a press conference, President Eisenhower was asked what the people should do to make the recession recede. Here is the dialogue that followed:

"A.—Buy."

"Q—Buy what?"

"A.—Anything."

The President was advised that this was possibly an oversimplified response in view of the fact that his own Secretary of the Treasury was then urging people to put their money into government bonds. The President then said the public should buy only what it needs and "wants." An appliance store in Killingsley, Connecticut, immediately responded by putting this sign in its window: "OKAY IKE, WE'RE DOING OUR PART!"

The countryside rang with slogans that drummed home the patriotic or selfish reasons why everyone should pitch in and consume more. In Detroit, a forty-five-voice chorus cried out five hundred times a week over television and radio: "Buy days mean paydays . . . and paydays mean better days. . . . So buy, buy! . . . something that you need today." Other slogans beamed at the American public were:

"You auto buy now."

"Buy now—the job you save may be your own."

"Buy and be happy."

"Buy, buy, buy; it's your patriotic duty."

"Buy your way to prosperity."

The Advertising Council unleashed a campaign to create "Confidence in a Growing America." And the State Commerce Commissioner of New York conferred with business and labor leaders and then launched a campaign to persuade the public to "Buy it now!" The onus was on the consumer to save the day.

Whether dutiful consumers licked the recession is not clear. The federal government, while it acted quietly, certainly played a major role. It poured several billion extra dollars into the economy for such things as pay raises, farm subsidies, missiles, and highways, thus unquestionably helping to quicken the enfeebled national economic pulse. But consumer spending was probably decisive, because there never was any serious over-all decline in buying by consumers. In fact, four billion dollars more was spent for goods and services in 1958 than in 1957. Consumers spent less for big-ticket items such as appliances and motorcars, but their spending for services such as amusement and for "soft goods" such as food, clothing, tobacco, and drugs rose all during the recession.

By 1959, prosperity had returned even to the automobile and appliance industries. Cash registers were ringing merrily. Finally, too, but with plaguing slowness, the massive clot of unemployment began to dissolve into manageable proportions. Automation in three years had wiped out nearly a million jobs in industrial production, forcing many people to find jobs in the service industries. Meanwhile, increases in output per man seem likely to rise by about 40 per cent by 1970, and at least a million additional workers will be coming onto the labor market each year. The problem of absorbing them comfortably is likely to be most challenging.

The United States economy is depending on the willingness of consumers and the government to spend more each year than they have the preceding year. Some economists suggest that whenever United States citizens fail to step up their over-all consumption by at least 4 per cent in any given year they are inviting a "failure-to-grow recession." How to live with mounting productivity is each year becoming a more urgent problem for Americans, and soon it will be plaguing Western Europeans. In the United States, unused productive capacity is edging up almost every year. It has quadrupled in a decade.

In the early months of 1960, U.S. News & World Report indicated that the cornucopia of the United States was perhaps working too well when it said: "Goods are superabundant. Unsold cars in the hands of dealers are at a near record level. So are inventories of many kinds of household equipment. Steel output is having to be cut back." This was when consumers were breaking an all-time record in their spending.

At about the same time, President Eisenhower in his annual economic message said that prosperity could be sustained only if consumers—as well as management and labor—"perform their economic functions." Seymour Harris, Harvard University economist, aptly summed up the challenge facing the United States by stating: "Our private economy is faced with the tough problem of selling what it can produce."
