> 来源：Designs for the Pluriverse_ Radical Interdependence, -- Arturo Escobar, Arturo Escobar -- Single, Single, 2018 -- Duke University Press Books -- isbn13 9780822370901 -- 03d254cdfa953b4c28b5f6b9bd45855
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Designs for the Pluriverse_ Radical Interdependence, -- Arturo Escobar, Arturo Escobar -- Single, Single, 2018 -- Duke University Press Books -- isbn13 9780822370901 -- 03d254cdfa953b4c28b5f6b9bd45855.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 4: An Outline of Ontological Design

EaphsVriloTheAatiFear1,4;Wil, "OnolgicalDes— Laying the Ground" (2o06), 8o; Winograd and Flores, Understanding Computers and Cognition (1986), xi.

1 "Can We Auto-Correct Humanity?" by Prince Ea, posted online on September 29, 2014 by Prince Ea, 3.27 min: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dRisElhrQjQ (accessed on January 0, 217, when it had over eighteen million views). jallual y 10) a017) " 1 wil dangina and hean Be ngly gal rpa interdependent world" (the slogan of Public Radio International). One should always add "increasingly devastated" to this facile mantra. In this seemingly slight addition we find an expression of the challenges and politics of design. nnu al epoiun O 1Laak

3 I am drawing here on the insightful short book on the political geology of media technologies by Finnish theorist of digital culture Jussi Parikka, The Anthrobscene (2o16). See also Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy (2013, 95-104) for a discussion of the ethical and economic implications of the market in so-called conflict minerals. anu ecunone

4Virilio is likely the most enlightening critic of new technologies. He is most well known as a philosopher of speed, or, more precisely, ofthe relations mong speed, power, and technology. In his view, information and communication technologies, operating in real time, aterraatcllyurong-tandin expeienclacebodye n spe inguraga omsphere, a sac oliving rule by spee eeViri9, 1999,201The eralize delocalization caused by these technologies, and taken to its ultimateapplications by military technology, reveals for Virilio that what is at stake is contrasting conceptions of t vg r   ha   r there are too many 'collaborators' who are once again pulling the trick of redemptory progress, emancipation, [humans] liberated from al repression, etc." (99, 8). Viio atMMern'  rsr ic et in phenomenology, I wil return to the question of technology in the conclusion. m

The most insightfl f the cberpunk novels was, to my min William Gibso's Neur mancer (1984), where the term cyberspace was actually coined. In this and several of his subsequent novels, Gibson explores the changed body politics enacted by technology, in u discussion).

This aspect of the book draws heavily on Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg Gadamer. A tradition is a pervasive background or preunderstanding within which we act in, and interpret, the world; it is concealed by its obviousness; it is historically produced and impossible to describe in its entirety the hermeneutic circle. As Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela put it, referring to how they came up with the novel concept of autops, "ulo  nnut i eu we could orient ourselves differently and, perhaps, from the new perspective generate a new tradition" (98o, xvii). The novelty of their work lies precisely in the invention of a new lexicon for talking about biological existence, particularly cognition, as we shall see in the last chapter.

ohout he bookSios Fore an Drey iey u hisye of skill, such as Martin Luther King J. and the group Mothers against Drunk Driving. I have applied these concepts to the case of the activists in the movement of the black communities of the Colombian Pacific, whose activism can genuinely be seen as a practice of skillful disclosing and history making in the midst of a sustained attack on their territories and culture by developmentalist actors (Escobar 2008, 229236).

8An important part ofWinograd and Flores's framework is the development ofa linguistic appch tthe ork rganizatos baseon irectives"order, requestcnsations, and offers) and "commissives" (promises, acceptances, and rejections). In the 198os Flores developed a software program for organizations, called the Coordinator, based on the idea that organizations are networks of commitments operating in language. See Winograd and Flores (1986, chs. 5 and 1) and Flores and Flores Letelier (2013). Its objective was "to make the interactions transparent—to provide a ready-to-hand tool that operates in the domain of conversations for action" (1986, 159). Anthropologist Lucy Suchman (1994) has proposed a cogent critique of Winograd and Flores's reliance on speech act theory for their theory of organizations. In her opinion, their framework veers perilously close to the imposition of a Foucauldian disciplinary order by a group of allegedly enlightened designers, This leaves untouched organizations' links to power, while people's actions get normalized in the name of a higher form of rationality. In other words, she casts doubts on Winograd and Flores's claim that their approach constitutes an emancipatory alternative. I agree with most of this critique, although I am trying to recover the political potential of their view of ontological design through my interpretation, going beyond language.

What else is theanthopocene f not the result of desin choices, adesign itsel peaps? 1oThis is a very partial account of Fry's sustained attempt at providing a new foundation for design, developed through a number of major books and multiple articles. Fry's view articulates particular readings of evolutionary theory, sociotechnics, Nietzschean genealogy, and Heideggerian phenomenology. There is a practical side to Fry's work, particularly in urban design (besides design education, of course). This account is largely based on Fry's three main books of the last few years. (I will not discuss here aspects of Fry's work that are less convincing to me, such as his Nietzschean notion of the humax.)

11 See also Fry's current project, The Studio at the Edge of the World, http://www.thestudioattheedgeoftheworld.com/.

2 Besides Heidegger and Maturana, Ehrenfeld draws on the critique of industrial society by early Frankfurt school writers (particularly Erich Fromm), the Chilean critic of development Manfred Max-Neef, and Anthony Giddens's theory of structuration. Tellingly, he acknowledges Flores for introducing him to Heidegger and Maturana "through an intensive program in ontological design" in the Bay Area in the late 198os (2oo9, xxii). Those versed in contemporary critical social theory might find peculiar or problematic the combination of theoretical sources (say, going back to Fromm, who was indeed an enlightened critic of modernity), or the focus on addictive behavior, which might be seen as harking back to much-criticized psychological approaches, but here again I will encourage the more theoretically minded readers to consider Ehrenfeld's effort as a salient instance of ontological thought on design.

13 Ehrenfeld cites the local food movement and new toilets that instruct users about flushing decisions, which he sees as eventually inducing a more profound change of consciousness. The approach remains largely theoretical, however, and does not deal explicitly with politics. That said, the notions of flourishing, presencing (of Heideggerian and Buddhist derivation, a concept we will encounter again when discussing the work of Otto Scharmer and Katrin Kaufer below), and care are all elements of an emergent design lexicon.

14 Fry envisions seven possible types of human beings emerging, the character of which can be gleaned from the labels: homotecs (radically pro-technology), neo-nomads, war-takers, hoarder survivalists, scavengers, gatherers, and palingensiaists (keepers and re-creators of knowledge). See Fry (2o12, 205—211) for his discussion of these "people of the future."

15 This is an inadequate presentation of these authors' ideas. See their work at the Presencing Institute (https://www.presencing.com/). Their ideas are influenced by Heidegger and Varela as well as by organizational scholars Peter Senge and Brian Arthur. A problem with this framework that is often discussed (e.g., by PhD students in my graduate seminar on design) is the risk of co-optation owing to a lingering individualist orientation and the absence of a more explicit sense of politics. There is also a certain teleology in how the authors present the models of "economic evolution": the State-driven "Society 1.0," market-driven "Society 2.0," stakeholder-driven "Society 3.0," and ecosystem-driven "Society 4.o," or the "con-creative economy." As in much of this otherwise-creative work in the United States, there is very little explicit critique of capitalism, and an insufficiently examined willingness to work with corporations. On the positive side, I would say that this theory is unusual in that it tackles the inner work designers need to do in order to take seriously the challenges of presencing and nondualism.

16 For a related argument about moving beyond the autonomous individual that instead draws on historical and contemporary Western sources, see Dreyfus and Kelly (2o11). 17 On care, see Boff's (zoos) wrarlr. l.i- . re, ste Dreyrus and Kelly (2011).

17 On care, see Boff's (2oo2) work; his argument about care as a fundamental ontological structure is based on Heidegger, religious thought, and the everyday actions of common people. There is a voluminous feminist literature on care, from economists who focus on the care economy to scholars in science and technology studies who introduce ethical care concerns into the domain of relations between human and nonhuman (g. Haraway 2008). María Puig de la Bellacasa (2o15) brings an original angle into the care debates, that of the existing tension between the productivist time of capitalism, innovation, and technoscience (and, one might add, design as usual), on the one hand, and the temporalities required for an effective ethics of caring for the webs of relationality that maintain life, across the entire spectrum of material, human, and nonhuman forms, on the other.

18Sociedades abigarradas is a difficult term to translate; it can mean "motley, varigatd, jumbled, or heterogeneous societies."

While these fusins bring together music from practically all world regions, there e some places that constitute particularly rich musical sources at present, such as West Africa (Mali and Senegal); Cuba, Colombia, and Brazil in Latin America; and Europe and North America (in some of their folk traditions). (The London-based magazine Songlines is dedicated to these fusions.) I am afraid I know little about world musics from other world regions.

20 Fusion is actually a misnomer for what musicians mean. As the wel-known Flamenco singer Diego el Cigala says, the concept of fusion implies the disappearance of worlds, yet in musical collaborations the worlds do not disappear but are reenacted in dialogue. In support of this idea, el Cigala mentions a conversation with salsa musician Bebo Valdés: "Tu canta como ese gitano que eres que yo tocaré como el cubano que soy" ("you go ahead and sing like the Gypsy you are, and I will play like the Cuban I am"). See the program with El Cigala, "Diego el Cigala. Encuentro en el estudio," published by Canal Encuentro, Buenos Aires, August 21, 2014, 5.26 min: https://www.youtube.com/watch ?v=1oyhpNCqn9Y. Collaborations are found across all kinds of musics, including within classical, popular, and folk musics; witness, for instance, the fascinating collaboration Uniko (2004/2o11) between the San Francisco-based Kronos Quartet and the Finnish musicians Kimmo Pohjonen (accordion and voice) and Samuli Hosminen (voice sampling, live loops, and digital interfaces). Interestingly, musicians often describe collaborations as doing "what is best for the music" when they collaborate (as in jam sessions, but more pointedly in intergenre productions). Two explicit conversations in this regard that I happen to know of are that among the Venetian electronic music composer Luigi Nono, the director Claudio Abbado, and the pianist Murizio Pollini (see the documentary A Trail on the Water, directed by Bettina Ehrhardt [zoo1]), and, in a very different vein, that among Argentinean folk musicians Peteco Carabajal, the duo Coplanacu, and Raly Barrionuevo (see the DvD of their collaboration, La Juntada (Carabajal, Coplanacu and Barrionuevo 2004).

21Attali bases his argument about composition on avant-garde composers such as Luciano Berio, John Cage, Luigi Nono, and Pierre Boulez but alsoon American freejazz, a mixture of African American popular music and European experimental music.
