> 来源：Designs for the Pluriverse_ Radical Interdependence, -- Arturo Escobar, Arturo Escobar -- Single, Single, 2018 -- Duke University Press Books -- isbn13 9780822370901 -- 03d254cdfa953b4c28b5f6b9bd45855
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Designs for the Pluriverse_ Radical Interdependence, -- Arturo Escobar, Arturo Escobar -- Single, Single, 2018 -- Duke University Press Books -- isbn13 9780822370901 -- 03d254cdfa953b4c28b5f6b9bd45855.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Chapter 5: Design for Transitions

Epiraphs: Irwn TransinDesi:A ropsalfor NewEra oDesin Practic Su and Research" (2015), 1, 4; Tonkinwise, "Design's (Dis)Orders and Transition Design" (01), 12; Manzini, Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design fr Social Innovation (2015), 2.

1 I use the term transition rather than transformation since that is the actual term used by most of the frameworks discussed here. Some of the TDs can be criticized on many grounds (e.g., their lack of attention to questions of power and domination in terms of class, gender, and race, or their continued reliance on modernist premises). However, most imply a radical notion of transformation at many levels. In some cases, the meaning of transition is similar to Karl Polanyi's (1957) notion of "the great transformation"; in others, a transition is seen as entailing many types of transformation. Most exhibit a profound open-endedness and awareness of being one of many possible stories. In contrast to well-known areas of transition research in the social sciences (e.g., transitions to postsocialism, postcapitalism, or postconflict), the TDs presented here bracket straightforward teleologies, even if they, too, tell a story with a "from" and a "toward." Some explicitly appeal to nonlinear aynaucs, cmg l to nonlinear dvnamics, emergence, and self-organization. .1 ..ltural

The TDs cited here represent a segment of the literature. They range from the more cultural from the dystopian collapse,decline and descent, survival apocalypse, etc. to the reconstructive e.g., conscious evolution, collective intelligence, sacredness, saving the planet and humans, and so forth). There is lots to be learned from these visions and proposals, which academics and designers rarely consider. The entire fieldof spiritual ecology can be seen as a space for TDS. seen as a space for TDS. tha astamatic studv and promo-

The Great Transition Initiative is a network devoted to the systematic study and promotion of transition ideas and strategies, housed at the Tellus Institute in Boston. Its origins date back to 1995, with the creation of the Global Scenario Group by Paul Raskin and the Argentinean modeling expert Gilberto Gallopin. See the initiative's website, http:// www.greattransition.org/. www.greattransition.org/. Lial strands of the academy Within

This is an exciting and growing area, even in some critical strands of the academy Within 4 the West, it has predecessors in the works of Vladimir Vernadsky and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, among others, but also in the traditions of immanence, vitalism, and process thought. It should be emphasized that a sentient universe is a core idea—indeed a reality— in many indigenous cosmologies. in many indigenous cosmologies. teadl till (httn://www.ecozoic

S See the work of the Center for Ecozoic Societies in Chapel Hill (http://www.ecozoic societies.org/), directed by Herman Greene, which is largely devoted to Berry's work. Berry actually posited a definition of the anthropocene avant la lettre; in an essay from 1988, beautifully entitled The Dream ofthe Earth, he wrote, "We are acting on a geologicl nbigicr eWe hag heet he an. The anthropogenic shock that is overwhelming the earth is of an order of magnitude beyond anything previously known in human historical or cultural development." (206, 211).

For the project ed y Greene, eeenter orEcozoic Socites, htp://z ry olv al o/network/ecologicalcivilization-intenatinalForelatprojects,se on /whitehead2o15/; Pando Populus, http://www.pandopopulus.com/.

Te e cose ive undrecus orwi agey he Norh) egd in pn spye Te r  niv  eti fesle.See he Transitin Networks websie, https:/ransionework.rg/.

T   rbasl tion of a grou o ecologicl ecnoists an degrowh scholars within cA (Instiut de Cienciai Tecnologia Ambientals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona); this group's scholarly production is an impressive effort at building a comprehensive framework for degrowth. See especially Schneider, Lalis, and Martinez-Alier (2o1o); Martínez-Alier (29); Kals (2o1); Kallis, Kerscne andMartnez-Alier (2012); Cattaneoet al. (2012); Sv1 anal 0A, Demaria, and Kallis (2015).

10 For analyses of the notions of Buen Vivir and the rights of nature, see the useful short volumes by Alberto Acosta (2010) and Acosta and Esperanza Martínez (2009a, 2009b); and the valuable overviews in Eduardo Gudynas's (2014, 2015) works. There is a considerable literature on these topics; see Escobar (2o15a) for a list of pertinent references. The monthly journal América Latina en Movimiento is an excellent source of intellectual-activist writings on these subjects, with special issues on Buen Vivir (452, 462), transitions (473), postdevelopment (445), and so forth (http://www.alainet.org). I should make it clear that for reasons of space I will not discuss the application of the notions of Buen Vivir and the rights of nature by progressive regimes like those in Ecuador and Bolivia; as is well known in theregn hi ppiction hs been seectiv n cn.

11 There are related notions in the South, such as the southern African notion of ubuntu, which cannot be discussed here. For a comparison of degrowth, swaraj, and Buen Vivir, see Kothari, Demaria, and Acosta (2015).

12 The literature on emergence and self-organization is huge, and I will not even try to summariz t here See, . Capr ndLuii ()or  very useul and up to date umy account; Varela (1999); Escobar (2004; 2008, ch. 6) for a short summary. At the Transition Design Workshop to be discussed shortly, Manzini discussed this concept by analyzing the emergence of capitalism and the collapse of the Soviet Union as tw contrasting instances of emergence.

1 The meeting, called the Doctoral Reviews and Transition Design Symposium, was held at cu in Pittsburgh on March 67, 2015; it gathered about fifty participants, including the main faculty affiliated with the program (Terry Irwin, Cameron Tonkinwise, Gideon Kossoff, and Peter Scupelli), five current PhD students, former PhD students from the school, and outside guest speakers. Anne-Marie Willis and Ezio Manzini gave the symposium's main talks. also attended the meeting.

The presentation is largely based on the following texts and on my participation at the symposium: Irwin 2015; Irwin, Kossoff, and Tonkinwise 2015; Kossoff 2011, 2015; Scupelli 2015; Tonkinwise 2012, 2013a, 2013b, 2014, 2015; Irwin et al. 2015; and Manzini 2015. I will not refer to specific texts in this presentation, except for explicit quotations. While most of the presentation in this section and the next will be straightforward (that is, based on the ideas found in the sources), some of it willtake the form of the "point counter point" described by one of the main characters (a writer) in Aldous Huxley's self-described "novel of ideas" from 1928 with the same title: "The modulations, not merely from one key to another, but from mood to mood. A theme is stated, then developed, pushed out of shape, imperceptibly deformed, until, though still recognizably the same, it has become quite different" ([1928] 1996, 293294). This dynamic of "contrapuntal plots" often operates in academic writing. C

15 See the interesting and unique Carnegie Mellon School of Design framework, from the School's website. http://design.cmu.edu/content/program-framework.

This point was made emphatically by Damian White, from the Rhode Island School of Nhe san   is inhis par(0). Desgn, qurng ue sympusiuny a

Besides living-systems theory, the current Theories of Change component includes social-practice theory, some critiques of modernity (e.g., that of Illich), and poststructuralist analysis of dominant discourses such as development. In my view, one strategy to enrich the Theories of Change dimension of the framework is to selectively identify proposals that in one way or another are likely to illuminate particular roadblocks or difficult steps in moving transition design forward. A key issue is how to rethink the economy, and the most developed proposal in this area, to my mind, is J. K. Gibson-Graham's diverse economies framework, which I would say has a design-friendly imagination (Gibson-Graham 2006; Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy 2013), and the Latin American social and solidarity economy (e.g., Coraggio and Laville 2o14; Coraggio, Laville, and Cattani 2013). Epistemological issues could be constructively discussed with the help of the Epistemologies ofthe South framework, decolonial thinking, and political ontology, discussed in chapter 2. This could buttress the non-Eurocentric spirit of the project. It seems to me also that there is a great need for the framework to incorporate some of the work in science and technology studies and feminist political ecology dealing with key questions of importance to design, such as bodies, materiality, and the reconstruction of technoscience. 8 As Tonkinwise puts it, "most designers focus on merely improving existing life styles or ways of working. This is design as business-as-usual enhancement" (2014, 7). The transition designer would opt for a different ethics.

19 Phenomenologically speaking, the book can be said to be the product of a practitioner who has become a master at his practice, that is, one who practices design at its best. J

YYA Manzini's examples include collaborative services and housing programs in the United Kingdom and Italy, as well as the slow food and democratic psychiatry movements in Italy. He draws throughout the book on the rich experience of the Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability Network, based in Milan but with participant nodes (affiliated university and design school labs) in a number of countries (see http://www.desis -network.org/).

2This is a feature that Manzini clearly adumbrates, even if he does not elaborate on it; for him, the emergent new civilization takes place within a complex pluriverse; see, e.g., p. of his book.

Whether implicitly or explicitly, there is a clear cultural critique of both individualism and disabling expert-driven institutions in Manzini's vision, echoing Illich's radical critiques of the same systems.

The Life Projects Network is cordinated by Mari Blaserin Newfoundland Cana. As its portal describes, it is intended "to access a variety of ongoing experiments across the Americas that seek to foster the various practices of a good lie that emerge from particular places, historical trajectories and conceptions of reality. The term 'Life Projects' is fundamentally a place holder that stands for practices of a good life that in one way or another differ from 'Development Projects' (in both, Right and Left wing versions), that is, visions and practices of a good life premised on the primacy of the 'Human.'" See their website, The Life Projects Network, https://wwwlifeprovida.net/index.php?langen. " Mansin

Manzini underscores an important element in this dynamic "This means that the capacity of people and communities cannot be increased from the bottom up only, by distributing dedicated toolkits. It is necessary to combine different kinds of intervention, based on different strategies. It follows that the toolkits we are talking about must be part of a wider set of services and communicative artifacts that compete not only to foster their own good use, but also to reinforce motivations to use them" (2o15, 184). Elsewhere (Escobar 20o1), I have spoken about subaltern social movements engaging in a twofold set of strategies: strategies of localization (place based), for the defense of their territories and cultures, and strategies of interweaving with other struggles, against shared structuring conditions of domination; the latter might be explained today in terms of distributed power and agency.
