> 来源：Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 8. Statistics, Maps, Patents, and Governance

1. Condorcet, Fragment on the New Atlantis, or Combined Efforts of the Human Species for the Advancement of Science, reprinted in Condorcet: Selected Writings, ed. K. M. Baker (Indianapolis, 1976), 300.

2. In this regard, see Kuhn's use of what he calls the Merton thesis to explain the "geographical patterns" in science: Thomas Kuhn, "Mathematical versus Experimental Traditions in the Development of Physical Science," in his The Essential Tension (Chicago, 1977), 58-59.

3. Claude Nicolet, L'Idée républicaine, 310.

4. Gabino Barreda's educational reform in 1867 was the bedrock on which the scientific turn of the late nineteenth century was based. See Hale, Transformation of Liberalism, 141.

5. José Yves Limantour, Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Lic. José Ives Limantour (Mexico City, 1901), 1.

6. México, Secretaría de Fomento, Reglamento económico de la Junta y personas auxiliares de la Comisión mexicana en la Exposición Universal de París EXP, Box 18, Exp. 8, p. 10.

7. Annotated circular, EXP, Box l, Exp. 18, p. 8. See also article 25 of Reglamento, EXP, Box 18, Exp. 8, p. 10. The article asked the directors of each of the nine groups of products to keep themselves up-to-date in their respective areas of production, scientific expertise, or artistic concerns.

8. I examined the symbolic aspects in chapters 5, 6, and 7.

9. In this regard, see K. Rose's review essay, "Governing by Numbers: Figuring out Democracy," Accounting, Organizations and Society 16 (1991):673-92; and Ian Hacking's books on the history of statistics and probability: The Emergence of Probability (Cambridge, 1975) and The Taming of Chance (Cambridge, 1990).

10. For instance, in 1851 the comparative tables on moral statistics of the French statistician A. M. Guerry won recognition during the Crystal Palace meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science: A. M. Guerry, Essai sur la statistique morale de la France (Paris, 1833). See Hacking, Taming of Chance, 77.
