> 来源：Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 10. Irony

1. For Baudelaire's views, see Charles Baudelaire, "Exposition Universelle 1855: Beaux-Arts," in his Oeuvres complètes: Préface, présentation et notes de Marcel A. Ruff (Paris, 1968), 361-70. For Henry Adams's, see his beautiful account of the Chicago Columbian exhibition in his The Education of Henry Adams (New York, 1918), 331-45.

2. In this regard, see Hale, Transformation of Liberalism; Guerra, México, vol. 1 (Mexico City, 1988); and Alicia Perales Ojeda, Asociaciones literarias mexicanas: Siglo XIX (Mexico City, 1957). For an insightful parallel regarding the mutual creation of a particular polity and a public opinion, see Keith Baker, "Public Opinion as Political Invention," in his The Invention of the French Revolution (Cambridge, 1990), 167-99.

3. The Porfirian regime was active in repressing the press, but it was even more successful in "sponsoring" newspapers and journalists. According to Bulnes, by the end of the Porfirian period 70 percent of the intellectuals and journalists were on the government's payroll. Nonetheless, between 1889 and 1900 active opposition could be found in newspapers such as El Hijo del Ahuizote, El Diario del Hogar, El Monitor del Pueblo (1885-1893), El Popular (beginning in 1897), to a certain extent The Mexican Herald (beginning in 1895), and El Siglo XIX (until 1896). See González Navarro, HMM, 388; José Bravo Ugarte, Periodistas y periódicos mexicanos hasta 1935 (Mexico City, 1966); Florence Toussaint Alcaraz, Escenario de la prensa en el porfiriato (Mexico City, 1989); Henry Lepidus, The History of Mexican Journalism (Columbia, 1928), 47-80; and Maria del Carmen Ruiz Castañeda, "La prensa durante el por-firiato," in El periodismo en México: 450 años de historia, ed. María del Carmen Ruiz Castañeda (Mexico City, 1974), 209-64.

4. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 15 February 1989, 6. "Schnetz and Company" is a reference to E. Schnetz, a former member of the French tobacco company in Paris and Havana and an entrepreneur in Mexico who promoted French investment in manufacturing and in land-demarcation companies.

5. Ibid.
