> 来源：Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo)\Mexico at the worlds fairs crafting a modern nation (Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 6. Ibid., 6.

7. El Diario del Hogar, 13 April 1888. For criticism of Pacheco's colonization policies, see El Diario del Hogar, 25 September 1889; 6, 8, 11, 12, and 26 October 1889; and 13 November 1889. In those editorials El Diario del Hogar analyzed the failure of colonization and the problems with Americans, French, Dutch, Germans, Italians, Chinese, Spaniards, and Blacks from Africa.

8. Ibid., 14 April 1888.

9. Ibid. The same newspaper complained on 15 February 1889 that Pacheco was negligent in his colonizing polices.

10. In Spanish, exponer can mean to exhibit, but it can also mean to expose, to show, to disclose, to put at risk, to uncover. Curiously, the French art and literary critic Philippe Hamon has written a book, Expositions, about literature and architecture in nineteenthcentury France, taking as his point of departure the ambivalence of the word exposition and of the verb exposer in French.

11. Época Ilustrado, 23 November 1884.

12. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 29 January 1899, 65.

13. Ibid., 17 March 1889, 1.

14. Ibid., 4 June 1899, 160-61.

15. Ibid., 3 February 1889, 1.

16. Ibid., 20 January 1889, 1.

17. Ibid., 7 July 1889, 3.

18. Letters between Díaz Mimiaga and Porfirio Díaz, UIA-Díaz, Box 5, Leg. 15, Doc. 2497-2499.

19. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 8 September 1889, 3.

20. Ibid., 11 August 1889, 3.

21. Ibid., 18 February 1900, 101. I cannot fully dissect the irony of this satire because it refers to the specific humorous phrases and places of the time.

22. El Diario del Hogar, 15 March t 888.

23. Ibid., 13 April 1888. The official figure of 450,000 pesos was compared with the 200,000-peso budget of the United States.

24. El Economista Mexicano, reprinted and discussed in El Diario del Hogar, 17 February 1888.

25. El Diario del Hogar, 16 June 1889.

26. Federico Gamboa, Mi diario: Mucho de mi vida y algo de los otros, 1st series, vol. 3 (Mexico City, 1920), 352-53.

27. Ibid., 1st series, vol. 1, 51. This is what he commented after receiving an offer to translate his novel Apariencias: see ibid., 51.

28. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 20 January 1889, 4-5.

29. For Amado Nervo's effort to be named envoy to the 1900 Paris fair, see Salado Ádvarez, Memorias, 280-82. Nervo sought to be appointed an envoy of El Imparcial, but an article he published in the Revista Moderna irritated the director of El Imparcial, and he had to survive in Paris writing for many small papers. Ireneo Paz was an envoy of El Diario del Hogar and his own newspaper, La Patria, in 1889 and of E1 Imparcial in 1900. Díaz Dufoo was the envoy of El Imparcial in 1900. There is some evidence of Angel del Campo's work as an envoy of Associated Press of Mexico at the 1893 Chicago exposition.

30. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 29 April 1900, 297.

31. Ibid., 29 April 1900, 267. This is Charles Hale's suggestion. I thank him for the reference.

32. El Diario del Hogar, 14 July 1888, editorial.

33. Ibid., 20 January 1889.

35. Ibid., 8 March 1888.

36. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 11 August 1889, 3.

37. El Diario del Hogar, 23 August 1888.

38. Ibid., 25 September 1889.

39. La Crónica, 16 June 1889.

40. El Diario del Hogar, 14 April 1888.

41. See the complaints in ibid., 15 March 1888.

42. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 7 July 1889, 3. "Ramoncito" is a reference to Ramón Fernández, Mexican minister in France.

43. Ibid., 9 April 1889, 232-33.

44. El México Gráfico, 29 July 1888, 4-5.

45. The matador outfit might refer to his problems with antibullfight campaigns in 1888; he was so fond of these spectacles that he himself inaugurated the Plaza Bucareli in 1888 and the Plaza México in 1889. See González Navarro, HMM, 729-33.

46. See, for example, El Diario del Hogar, 8 March, 24 July, and 22 August, 1888 (complaints about expenditures and need for sanitary reforms). About tenant houses and hygiene, see El Diario del Hogar, 7 September 1888.

47. Ibid., 14 September 1888.

48. Ibid., 8 May 1889.

49. Ibid., 2 January 1900.

50. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 8 January 1899, 3.

51. México Gráfico, 9 February 1890, 1.

52. Ibid., 11 May 1890, 1.

53. El Hijo del Ahuizote, 8 April 1900.

54. Ibid., 2 June 1901, 388.

55. Emilio Rabasa, La bola y la gran ciencia (Mexico City, 1948), 9.

56. El México Gráfico, 11 January 1891, 1.

57. El Universal, 7 January 1894.

58. These announcements were among the thousands of commercial "therapeutical" announcements in the media during the 1880s and 1890s.

59. See El Diario del Hogar, 6 September 1889.

60. Ibid., 23 January 1900.

61. Bulnes, Elporvenir, 249.

62. El Diario del Hogar, 29 October 1889.

63. Bulnes, El porvenir, 70.

64. Ibid., 270-71.

11. Toward Revolutionary Mexico

1. In this regard, see my introduction.

2. During the first months of 1890, various communications dealt with the possibility of sending part of Mexico's exhibit at Paris to the 1890 Glasgow world's fair. Finally, the Mexican government announced its decision not to join the Glasgow fair. Therefore, the Mexican exhibition team began to prepare what was planned to be Mexico's greatest presenceat the Chicago fair of 1893and the historical exhibit for Madrid in 1892.

3. The total cost of disassembling was 111,600 francs (Díaz Mimiaga, EXP, Box 12, Exp. 6, p. 46).

4. See de Anza's recommendations for disassembling the Aztec Palace in BEMP 5 (1889):743-47, 781-800.

5. The old inventory of expositions shows several signs of the serious damage suffered by one of the main steel columns of the building. Those documents are lost. See Inventario, EXP, Box 102, Exp. 9.

6. In 1891 there were rumors that the Aztec Palace was to be reassembled on a site belonging to the School of Agriculture, in Tacuba and Popotla (see Pérez Walters, "Jesús Contreras"; and Ramírez, "Dioses," 253). Later, the sculptures of the palace were stored at the Artillery Museum in the Ciudadela in Mexico City. There were also rumors that the Aztec palace was going to be reerected for the 1893 Chicago fair (see IPBA, Box 236, Exp. 6, f. 1; and letter by Ramón Fernández, SRE 44-6-13, II).

7. Gustavo Casasola's collection includes pictures of the patio of the National Museum of Artillery and of Contreras's sculptures. See Gustavo Casasola, Seis siglos de historia gráfica de México, 1325- 1900, vol. 2 (Mexico City, 1967), 1082-83.

8. See México, Distrito Federal, Catálogo de monumentos escultóricos y conmemorativos del Distrito Federal (Mexico City, 1976).

9. Itzcoatl, Nezahualcoyotl, and Totoquihuatzin.

10. By the 1990s Contreras's sculptures had once again been relocated. Another sign of the epoch was that at the same time that Contreras was reappreciated and honored with an exhibition in the National Museum of Mexico City, the Mexican army reopened a museum in downtown Mexico City and located copies of Contreras's works at the side of the colonial building designed by Manuel Tolsathe Palacio de Minería.

11. Report, M. Caballero to George R. Davis, EXP, Box 83, Exp.   
18.

12. See Report, Serrano to Davis, EXP, Box 84, Exp. 18; and Godoy, La ciudad de Chicago, 94-95.

13. Report, Serrano to Davis, EXP, Box 84, Exp. 18.

14. See José María Vigil, Poetisas mexicanas, siglos XVI, XVII, XVIII y XIX (Mexico City, 1893).

15. See Mexico, Comisión Geográfico-Exploradora, Exposición Internacional Colombina de Chicago en 1893, Catálogo de los objetos que componen el contingente de la comisión (Jalapa, 1893). This catalogue was also prepared by Agustín Díaz.

16. See the report sent by M. Serrano to George R. Davis, general director of the Chicago fair, EXP, Box 83, Exp. 12, pp. 5-12.

17. The old Inventario (EXP, Box 102, Exp. 9) also contains some evidence of the request for financial support made by Othón Tello from Chihuahua to exhibit an Indian or Aztec town in Chicago (see the old Inventario's classification, Exp. 2564, which is lost in the new organization of EXP).

18. Photographs of these replicas are found in The Columbian Exposition Album (New York, 1893). See also E. H. Thompson, The Chultunes of Labná, Yucatán, Peabody Museum Memoirs, vol. 1, no. 3 (Cambridge, 1897); Thompson's memoirs, Peoples of the Serpent: Life and Adventure among the Mayas (Boston, 1932); and Don D. Fowler and Nancy J. Parezo, "Mayans in Chicago, Mound Builders in Buffalo: Archaeology at World's Fairs, 1876-1915" (paper presented at the History of Archaeology Sympo-

sium, Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting, Saint Louis, Mo., April 16, 1993). Regarding the exhibits of "exotic" peoples in Chicago, see R. Rydell, All the World's a Fair; and Rydell, "A Cultural Frankenstein? The Chicago World's Columbian Exposition of 1893," in Grand Illusions: Chicago's World's Fair of 1893, ed. Neil Harris et al. (Chicago, 1993), 143- 70.

19. James Gilbert, Perfect Cities: Chicago's Utopias of 1893 (Chicago, 1991), 109. The Midway Exhibit was based on Putnam's anthropological conception of evolution.

20. See Edward C. Relph, The Modern Urban Landscape (Baltimore, 1987); and Peter Blake, Frank Lloyd Wright: Architectural Space (Baltimore, 1965), 22-24.

21. The most remarkable example of Wright's Mayan influence was depicted in the Hollyhock House, constructed in 1928 in California. On Wright's Mayan inspiration derived from the 1893 Chicago fair, see Jack Quinan, "Frank Lloyd Wright in 1893: The Chicago Context," in Frank Lloyd Wright in the Realm of Ideas, ed. Bruce Brooks (Carbondale, 1988), 119-32; and, especially, D. Tselos, "Exotic Influences in the Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright," Magazine of Art, April 1953, 163.

22. See Walter G. Cooper, The Cotton States and International Exposition and South, Illustrated (Atlanta, 1896), 49-5o. Col. Isaac W. Avery was sent to South America and Mexico. For Mexico, Charles H. Redding was the special agent.

23. See the report by Gregorio G. González in Mexico, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1892-96 (Mexico City, 1898), 59, 282-89.

24. Cooper, Cotton States, 90.

26. James B. Haynes, History of the Trans-Mississippi and International Exposition of 1898 (Omaha, 1910), 90-91.

27. Mexico earned a total of 611 awards. To put it in perspective, see the table presented in Nuncio's report of Mexico's presence at the 1901 Buffalo fair. According to this table, the largest numbers of prizes won by Mexico were at the 1893 Chicago fair (l,177) and the 1900 Paris fair (1,088). But in terms of number of Mexican exhibitors who won awards, Buffalo was the most successful presence: 71 percent of exhibitors received prizes, in contrast to 51 percent at the 1900 Paris fair and 32 percent at the 1893 Chicago fair. See Albino R. Nuncio's report, in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1901-1904 (Mexico City, 1909), 191. See also México, Official Catalogue of the Mexican Exhibit at the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo.

28. For a detailed list of the personnel involved in this fair, see México, Comisión Nacional Mexicana, Catálogo oficial de las exhibiciones de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, Exposición Internacional de St. Louis Mo., 1904 (Mexico City, 1904).

29. Chavero exhibited Apuntes viejos de bibliografía mexicana (1903); La piedra del sol. Estudio arqueológico (1886); Pinturas jeroglíficas, primera parte (1901); and Calendario o rueda del año de los antiguos mexicanos: Estudio cronológico (1901). Peñariel displayed, among other studies, Teotihuacán: Estudio arqueológico e histórico, texto y láminas, 2 vols. (1901-1902), Indumentaria antigua: Manera de vestir de los antiguos mexicanos, guerreros y civiles (1903), Colección de documentos para la historia mexicana, and his 1890 study, Monumentos del arte mexicano antiguo. See México, Comisión Nacional Mexicana, Catálogo oficial de las exhibiciones de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, 291-92.

30. See pictures and explanation in David R. Francis, The Universal Exposition of 1904, 2 vols. (Saint Louis, 1913).

31. M.J. Lowenstein, ed., Official Guide to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition (Saint Louis, 1904), 134.

32. See the analysis of the importance of this exhibit for Eliot's fascination with "primitivism," as he saw it in the 1904 Saint Louis fair, in Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: Collateral Evidence of His Fairoutings"; and Narita, "Eliot and the World's Fair of St. Louis: His 'Stockholder's Coupon Ticket.'''

33. For detailed descriptions of Mexico's presence at the New England fair, see the report by 'Albino R. Nuncio in México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1908- 1909 (Mexico City, 1910), 74-87. According to Nuncio, for Mexico the total cost of this fair was U.S.\$.8,274. For the 1909 San Antonio fair, see México, Secretaría de Fomento, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1909-1910 (Mexico City, 1910), 101-9. No cost was reported.

34. I develop the analysis of this exhibition more fully in M. Tenorio, "1900: At the Gates of Hell: Mexico and the 1900 Paris Fair" (manuscript).

35. See EXP, Box 64, Exp. 9, pp. 265-268; and Mier, México.

37. Inspired by the emphasis on electric light, Mexican authorities commissioned Rafael R. Arizpe to undertake a study of Mexico City's electrification. As a result, Arizpe produced the book El alumbrado público en la ciudad de México: Estudio histórico (Mexico City, 1900).

38. Rearick, Pleasures of the Belle Epoque, 144. See also Mandell, Paris 1900, ix. Man-dell maintains that the 1900 Paris fair "was the last time any one tried to include all of man's activity in one display" (p. xi).

39. Arnold J. Mayer, The Persistence of the Old Regime: Europe to the Great War (New York, 1981), 189.

40. George Steiner, In Bluebeard's Castle: Some Notes towards the Redefinition of Culture (New Haven, 1971), 5, 27.

41. Silverman, Art Nouveau, 266. The author quotes the French poet Maurice Rollinat.

42. For the idea of fin de siécle, see Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-Siècle Vienna: Politics and Culture (New York, 1980), xvii-xxvii.

43. Mier, México, 28.

44. See Circular 9, by Minister Fernández Leal, reproduced in ibid., 195-97. Regarding mining, see Carlos Sellerier, Data Referring to Mexican Mining, Prepared in View

of the Participation of Mexico in the Universal Exposition of Paris in 1900 (Mexico City, 1901).

45. The second most successful Mexican display, in terms of percentage of exhibitors winning awards, was that staged for the 1893 Chicago fair (32 percent). See Nuncio's report in Mexico, Anales de la Secretaría de Fomento, 1901-1904, 191. For a detailed list of exhibitors winning awards, see EXP, Box 55, Exp. 10, pp. 83-114.

46. See Mier's letter (25 April 1899), in which he writes about Contreras's petition to hire a French architect for the construction of the Mexican pavilion, in EXP, Box 69, Exp. 5.

47. See Mier's letter to Fernández Leal, 7 May 1889. He describes this conflict and acknowledges having received "three or four" projects by Contreras based on "la capilla del posto en Guadalupe" and in "la casa de los azulejos" in Mexico City. See EXP, Box 58, Exp. 2.

48. See Mier, México, 83 ff.

49. EXP, Box 31, Exp. 9, p. 65.

50. EXP, Box 31, Exp. 9, pp. 66-68.

51. For a description of the building, see Mier, México, 220-29; and for a detailed report of the construction, see de Anza's report to Minister Fernández Leal, in EXP, Box, 31, Exp. 9, PP. 85-104.

52. Reproduced in Mier, México, 227.

53. See Mariscal, El desarrollo de la arquitectura, 19. According to the author, Rodriguez Arangoity received a prize from Napoleon III at the imperial exhibition of 1859 for his plan for a port and naval school in Tehuantepec. See also Katzman, Arquitectura del siglo XIX en México (Mexico City, 1973), 375-76.

54. Reproduced in Mier, México, 229.

55. This was the description found in the anonymous, long manuscript report titled "La participación de las potencias extranjeras en la exposición de Paris. Mé-xico," in EXP, Box 59, Exp. 12, pp. 158-204.

56. On the illumination of the building, see EXP, Box 32, Exp. 6, pp. 34-46.

57. See "Contrato para la ejecución de los modelos en yeso de la decoración del pabellón mexicano en la Exposición Universal de Paris de 1900," in EXP, Box 32, Exp. 2, pp. 52-54.

58. Certificado, 31 July 1900, EXP, Box 58, Exp. 3.

59. See Yeats's poem "Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen," in W. B. Yeats, Símbo-los, bilingual ed. (Mexico City, 1977), 150-57.

60. "I am the one who yesterday used to say no more than / the blue verse and the profane song. . . / and being very eighteenth century and very antique / and very modern; bold, cosmopolitan / with strong Hugo and with ambiguous Verlaine, / and with an endless thirst of hopes" (Rubén Darío, "Yo soy aquel que ayer decía," in his Cantos de vida y esperanza [Buenos Aires, 1940 (first published in 1905)], 25-30).

61. "Science is in bankruptcy! So proclaims/A cry of the moribund century, / once again this is the time to grab the oriflamme / of illusion in its infinite term" (Jesús E. Valenzuela, "Poesía pronunciada por su autor en la velada organizada en honor del eminente filósofo don Gabino Barreda " La Revista Moderna, no. 7 [1900]:102-5).

62. Amado Nervo, letter to Salado Ádvarez, December 1897, in his Obras Completas (Madrid, 1973), 340.

63. About the 1915 San Francisco world's fair, see Allwood, Great Exhibitions, 117-122. For an analysis of the ethnographic and anthropological aspects of San Francisco's exposition, see the essays collected in Benedict, Anthropology of World's Fairs; and the insightful study by Rydell, All the World's a Fair. After San Francisco's world's fair, a comprehensive five-volume work was published which includes data and pictures on all aspects of the fair: Frank Morton Tood, The Story of the Panama-Pacific Exposition, 5 vols. (New York, 1921). For pictorial records, see Donna Ewald and Peter Clute, San Francisco Invites the World: The Panama-Pacific International Exposition of 1915 (San Francisco, 1991).

64. EXP, Box 94, Exp. 1. For Mexico's plans to participate in San Francisco's world's fair, see EXP, Box 94, all Exp.; Box 95, all Exp.; and Box 98, Exp. 1-16, 96, 97.

65. "Lista de expositores, FOTOGRAFIA (Photographers)," EXP, Box 94, Exp 5. It is not clear whether they agreed to participate.

66. For detailed data on U.S.-Mexican relations in the troubling years of 1913, 1914, and 1915, see Mark T. Gilderhus, Diplomacy and Revolution (Tucson, 1977); Berta Ulloa, La revolución intervenida: Relaciones diplomáticas entre México y Estados Unidos (1910-1914) (Mexico City, 1971); and the short but detailed work by James L. Tigner, "The Relation of the U.S. and Mexico, 1909-1914" (M.A. thesis, Stanford University, 1949). For a profound analysis of the real effectiveness of American intervention in times of tumult in Mexicoand of Mexico's nationalism in this contextsee Alan Knight, U.S.-Mexican Relations, 1910-1940 (San Diego, 1987), 103-42.

67. In this regard, see the important explanations of 1914 as the year zero in economic terms in Womack, "Mexican Economy during the Revolution."

68. Tood, Story of the Exposition, vol. 1, 9-10.

69. Adams, Education of Henry Adams, 331-32.

70. Amado Nervo, "Discurso pronunciado en una distribución de premios," Teatro Abreu, Mexico, in his Obras Completas, 494-96. The phrase, he said, was inspired by an Argentine poet whose name he did not mention.

71. E. L. Doctorow, World's Fair (New York, 1985), 253.

72. See Louis Marin's views on Disneyland in Utopiques, 297-324.
