> 来源：Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 4 Collaborative Organizations

To go further into what design for social innovation does, and what it could do, we must focus on the protagonists of each particular innovation. This means looking at the people who take part and the social forms they generate, and especially at the social forms in which people collaborate in order to achieve a result they would not be able to achieve alone, and that produces or could produce wider social value as a side effect. These social forms (these collaborative organizations) appear with widely differing characters and purposes, but they have one clear characteristic in common: their existence requires the active, collaborative participation of all interested parties. This cals for radically different ways of being and acting from those currently dominant. The task of design for social innovation can therefore be described as follows: it is a design action that seeks to make these ways of being and doing things (that is, the existence of these collaborative organizations) both possible and likely.

## New social forms

Social innovation occurs when people, expertise, and material assets come into contact in a new way that is able to create new meaning and unprecedented opportunities. So the likelihood of this happening depends largely on an encounter between people who collaborate to create value. There have always been encounters, and therefore collaborative organizations, of this kind, but today there is something special about them that comes from the specifics of the context in which are emerging. The way they occur today is an outcome of the way people's lives have evolved and the manner in which they are able to meet. As is easy to imagine, it comes from the fact that a growing number of people live in a world that is both highly problematic and highly connected.

## A meaningful example

Tyze is a collaborative organization supported by a digital platform to share vital health information and provide a fluid and easy way to connect the complicated lives of friends, family, and neighbors who are willing to give care to someone in need. At the same time, it is a practical way to cultivate family, neighborhood, and friendship links in contemporary fluid contexts of life and therefore, most probably, to increase the possibility of their lasting over time (example 4.1).

"Here is our radical idea," the Tyze promoters write to describe the initiative's mission: "Create a meaningful and active role for friends, family, and neighbors who are a critical part of the care equation. Share vital health information with the people who love the individual who's facing a challenge. Connect people to each other and to good information. By nurturing the connections, relationships and activities within a person's natural support network, we lay the foundation for their care." This presentation gives a clear idea of the Tyze motivation and way of working. What it doesn't say, and what in my view makes it so interesting and contemporary, is that it enhances a valuable resource that otherwise would have been lost.

## Example 4.1

## TYZE

Tyze is a service enabling personal, private, secure online networks that coordinate c n ctriut prov alth  sclus. he ab pontl l tools to bridge formal and informal systems of care.

Tyze is a social venture created to accelerate the adoption of a networked model re. In practical terms, it "leverages cloud computing to help people care or i r to smee, helping them create the wn network usig a secure ai cal, web-based solution that helps connect them around the one in need. With Tyz, y n rite it i m  helb or the person you care about; schedule appointments and events on a shared caler; share files, photos, updates, and much more anywhere, anytime. Tyze has been created by the PLAN Institute for Caring Citizenship, a nonprofit organization decatvige pee wilt communities. It was launched in Vancouver, and is now moving to the UK.

In fact, the care outcomes it offers could not happen without the hearty and active participation of friends, family, and neighbors—the precondition for aking this wholeitative viable. It is alsotrue that,without thisgial platform, these friends, family, and neighbors would often be unable to give this care because their complicated lives would make it impossible. In fact, in the past, friends, family, and neighbors might have been able to take care of the "individual who's facing the challenge" simply because they would have been living nearby and at least some f them, would have been able to sty at home and give the needed continuity in care. Today, for a growing number of people, life is quite different, and the wish to take care of someone is gieutat is ot upre ya plathat esm o share this responsibility. Tyze is a practical solution that offers easy, flexible tools to coordinate their activities (who does what and when), and the most important information. In other words, Tyze coordinates, in an effective and sensitive way, the complicated lives of friends, family, and neighbors, transforming different partial contributions into the needed continuum of caring activities: "Tyze brings everyone on to the same page to create the best possible outcomes and to highlight reciprocity, exchange and meaning."

## Between grassroots organizations and social networks

Like all the other examples of collaborative organizations, Tyze is clearly a very special case, closely bound to the specifics of the context it grew out of. What makes it stand out, and what has led me to choose it to open this chapter, is that it lies precisely at the intersection of two lines of innovation that together constitute the field of possibility for collaborative organizations. The first is driven by traditional grassroots organizations confronting new problems and getting connected. The other is driven by social networks supported by digital platforms, which are bridging digital and physical space and meeting real people with real-life problems.

Traditional grassroots organizations (box 4.1) and social networks (box 4.2) have a major point in common: the content and indeed the very existence of both depend on people who sustain them with their energy, their culture, their enthusiasm, and in particular their design capacity. In spite of this similarity, they have emerged in different contexts, driven by different motivations, and until a few years ago they were discussed and developed in different arenas. Grassroots organizations are created by groups of people living near each other who have decided to work together to solve tangible problems. Social networks, on the other hand, exist in digital space: an ecosystem where only information—texts, audio, music, photos, videos—can flow.

## Box 4.1

## Grassroots organizations

The notion of grassroots organizations has been around for a century. It denotes political initiatives driven by communities, as opposed to those decided and organized from the top: "The term implies that the creation of the movement and the group supporting it is natural and spontaneous, highlighting the differences between this and a movement that is orchestrated by traditional power structures."3 Later, the notion was extended to different activities and in particular to "innovation," opening a new perspective on the concept of grassroots: the idea that the creativity and knowledge needed to solve grassroots problems (the problems of everyday life) can also be found at grassroots level. This means that ordinary people can be expert in the problem they are facing in their everyday life and that, given the right conditions, they can find, or participate in finding, the most appropriate solutions. In other words, they are capable of producing innovation: "We use the term 'grassroots innovations' to describe networks of activists and organizations generating novel bottom-up solutions for sustainable development; solutions that respond to the local situation and the interests and values of the communities involved."4

Traditionally, grassroots organizations have mainly been understood to be alternative organizations: that is, entities separated from larger sociotechnical systems. Often the result is that, as Gill Seyfang and Adrian Smith write, they tend to isolate themselves and become closed organizations: "Paradoxically, a key benefit of grassroots innovations, namely, the 'world within a world,' undermines diffusion. Whilst practices where 'the rules are different' have certain strengths, those strengths become barriers when in concerted opposition to incumbent regimes."

Recently the distance between the two has started to shrink. On the one hand, as could be expected, grassroots organizations have been progressively penetrated by information and communication technologies. The result is that the use of dedicated websites has spread and these have gradually become the new grassroots organizing platforms. This organizational change has normally enabled such groups to become more effective, without radically modifying their system architecture or the main actors' role. Therefore we can now observe a substantial continuity between the original, low-tech grassroots organizations and the more mature and technologically empowered organizations into which they have evolved. The digital platform helps them do better something that could have been done without it, though admittedly with greater difficulty.

## Box 4.2

## Social networks

The notion of social networks, in the sense of social-media-based networks, is recent. The first ideas can be found in proposals for online communities in 1995. The current sense of this expression started in 2003, with the launch of My Space and LinkedIn. Normally, this expression refers to people and communities who, thanks to appropriate digital platforms-—the social media—share ideas, pictures, posts, activities, events, interests, and real-life experiences and, on this basis, decide to co-create, discuss, and modify contents (user-generated contents). The social media used can be very diverse, for instance blogs, picture sharing, wall postings, music sharing, crowd sourcing. These technologies enable us to imagine and enhance different types of initiatives: collaborative projects (e.g., Wikipedia), content communities (e.g., YouTube), social networking sites (e.g., Facebook), blogs and microblogs (.. Twitter), virtual social worlds (e.g., Second Life), and portals enabling offline group meetings (e.g., Meetup). What is particularly interesting for us here is the emerging trend of "location-based" digital services. Thanks to mobile phones, and the GPS they integrate, these location-based social media bridge virtual and physical space. In fact, given that the contents created by the users can be automatically "geotagged," other people can immediately see what is going on nearby, in physical space, and, if they like, can physically join it.

On the other hand, social networks (with their virtual communities) have started an impressive journey from digital space (and virtual reality),6 where they were born, to a hybrid space (and augmented reality):' a space where digital and physical dimensions coexist, where social media connect people (in digital space), to enable them to meet and act in the real world (i.e., in physical space). Today, surfing the web, we find thousands of websites that propose doing something together, with different motivations and modalities, but with a clear, strong common denominator: to create contact between scattered individuals who do not know each other, yet have similar visions and interests, and live not so far away (that is, they live near enough to make face-to-face encounters possible). On this basis, they propose very different kinds of meetings: from short, exceptional events in public space (flash mobs, meaning artistic performances or political acts)8 to long-term groups for practicing sports (such as the association Walking Groups)² or for mutual help in health care (such as circles of care that propose an approach to health care based on social networks).1

Looking at these groups from the point of view of the participants, once the first meeting has taken place they do not appear so different from the collaborative organizations we are discussing here: at that point what emerge and make the initiative successful are the same relational elements that make all collaborative organizations work: motivations, effectiveness, empathy between participants; the digital platforms (Meetup or something similar) simply act as a technological and organizational support. Today, as we have seen with the Tyze case, we can also find initiatives that are quite different from both the traditional grassroots organizations and the "traditional" social-media-based ones right from the beginning: these initiatives are at the core of the new kind of social forms I am referring to as collaborative organizations.

Summing up: the trajectories of the original low-tech grassroots organizations (based on people willing and able to collaborate in physical space) and of high-tech initiatives (based on the potential of social networks in digital space) are converging and now largely overlap, creating a new kind of hybrid social form. In this converging process, a positive loop can be recognized. Social networks find meaning in grassroots organizations, and opportunities to penetrate the reality of everyday life with all the difficult problems people are facing there. In turn, grassroots organizations find in social networks the enabling tools they need to move toward more effective, longer-lasting, replicable organizations, and therefore to scale up and increase their impact on mainstream models of thinking and doing. The positive loop between these two trajectories is extending the area of overlap, where a new wave of sociotechnical innovation can be generated and unprecedented digitally supported organizations can flourish.

## Bottom-up, top-down, and peer-to-peer

Even though collaborative organizations have been introduced as bottomup innovations (that is, as innovations mainly deriving from actions "from the bottom"), a closer observation of their evolution from initial idea toward more mature forms of organization indicates that their long-term existence, and often even their start-up, depend on complex mechanisms, and that the initiative taken directly by the people concerned (bottom-up interaction) is always supported by information exchanges with other similar organizations (peer-to-peer interaction) and by different kinds of intervention from institutions, civic organizations, or companies (top-down interaction).

Given all that, it can be observed that collaborative organizations are in part grassroots organizations. In fact, the active and collaborative involvement of the people directly concerned (the common and ordinary people) is the precondition for their very existence. However, to exist they also require the participation of other actors. In my view, the mix of bottom-up, top-down, and peer-to-peer interactions can be described better by the term "collaboration" than by "grassroots." In fact, grassrots normally refers to the activities of ordinary people as distinct from institutions and experts, whereas collaboration has a much more open meaning: derived from the Latin cum (with) and laborare (to work), collaboration means the act of working alongside someone to achieve something. In the collaborative organizations we are considering here, this collaboration is not limited to horizontal initiatives within grassroots groups, but can be extended to relationships established in all possible directions. Of course the meaning o grassroots could be stretched to include this complexity of interactions. But, in order to avoid misunderstanding when discussing this new phase in the grassroots story, it seems to me safer to use an expression like "collaborative organizations," which is newer, and therefore not charged with the historical, often obsolete connotations we might associate with "grassroots."

In sum, it can be said that collaborative organizations should be considered as bottom-up initiatives not because everything happens at grassroots level, but because the precondition for their existence is the active involvement of people directly concerned.

## Collaborating by choice

At this point, I can give a more precise definition of collaborative organizations:

Collaborative organizations are social groups emerging in highly connected environments. Their members choose to collaborate with the aim of achieving specific results, and, in doing so, they also create social, economic, and environmental benefits. They are characterized by freedom of choice (their members can freely decide whether, when, and how to join or leave the group) and openness (they present a positive attitude toward "others": other people, other ideas, other organizations).

Given that, let's start by focusing on the role of free choice, meaning choices made by subjects who are free to decide what to do and how to do it. To go further into how expert design may foster and sustain them, we must start by observing the people involved more closely; we must consider how and why they can and want to define life projects that entail being active and collaborative.

## Life projects and collaborative behaviors

As was said in chapter 2, conceiving and putting into practice life projects is part of human nature. Nevertheless, in different times and places it has appeared and evolved in different ways. In particular, it is only with modernity'l that human beings have started to recognize themselves as subjects in the sense that we usually use the term today (and that I am adopting in this book). In other words, it is only with modernity that, for growing numbers of people, it has become possible, and subsequently even mandatory, to build their own idea of well-being and to define (or at least to try to define) their own life projects. In fact, only with modernity does socialization not subordinate the subject to the community, and not confine the individual search for happiness within the strict rules on which that community is based (and that cause individual lives to be largely predetermined by the time, place, and social conditions in which each has happened to be born) (box 4.3).

How and to what extent modernity's promise of the designability of one's own life has been fulfilled is obviously an open question. Once expressed, however, this idea has become one of the fundamental grounds underlying socialization for millions of people, and one of the main regulators of many societies (at least for those social groups that, from this point of view, can be considered "modern" or "modernizing"). For the moment, let's be content to say that in a period of great, turbulent transformation like the present, for a growing number of people ideas on well-being must be invented (and reinvented) each day. So we can see them as subjects who must constantly define and redefine their life projects. They must ponder what well-being they are looking for, what possibilities they have of reaching it, and what steps they must take to get there. We should add that even though their choices are individual, the sense system in which they are made is in any case a collective artifact: a cultural construction resulting from a vast and complex social conversation; a sense system that anyone may confirm or reject, but that no one can ignore.

Collaborative organizations have emerged from this social conversation. That is, they are rooted in the spirit of modernity, at the point where its characterizing trend toward individualization clashes with the problems that this individualization itself generates. The result is that these collaborative organizations are free and reversible social forms, the members of which can freely decide whether, when, and how to join or leave. At the same time, they are organizations open to "others": to people who are not members of the same organization, and to the ideas they may express.

## Box 4.3

## Modernity and life projects

What we call modernity is a human condition in which, at least in principle, there are subjects who are free to choose and therefore able to formulate their own life projects. In the premodern condition, this was rarely possible. As Anthony Giddens writes, for the majority of people there was no possibility of designing one's own life because, in fact, few options were permitted under the strong traditions and behavioral conventions of the time. As tradition weakened, people found themselves having to negotiate and choose—from a multiplicity of possible options and referents—what lifestyles to adopt. So, in moving from premodern to modern society, they had to learn to design their own lives. Ulrich Beck underlines how, today, this design orientation is no longer an option: when faced with alternatives, we are forced to make a decision (even if we may be unaware of all its implications).13

We should add that for the whole of the twentieth century the tendency toward needing to design one's own life went hand in hand with an everincreasing individualization (this too to be seen in relation to the progressive weakening of traditions and the social ties that characterized them). The outcome of this twofold evolution is that, in our current modernized societies, people find themselves seeking to design their lives and having to do so alone, which is very often quite difficult and generates frustration. The social innovation we are concerned with here—and especially when it leads to the creation of collaborative organizations—demonstrates that it is also possible to follow another path and separate the question of life projects from that of individualization as we have known it up to now. The social innovation of recent years shows us that life projects in the sense of individual quests for one's own wellbeing are not the only ones possible. Collaborative life projects are also feasible. These are life projects based on the idea that doing things with others may lead to better results, and may even be more interesting and enjoyable.

This freedom, reversibility, and openness is what mostly distinguishes contemporary organizations from traditional communities. In fact, for traditional communities (in mature modern societies this means the communities of the past, but in several other regions of the world they are still alive, involving a large part of the population) collaboration was not a choice. For their members, the existence of a tight, dense fabric of social ties was a given condition: the social environment (family, clan, village, neighborhood) where they were born and where, most probably, they would have to live their entire life. These traditional communities are rather closed organizations: their members relate mainly, if not only, to other members of the same community, with few opportunities and motivations to connect with people and situations external to that particular community.

## Free, reversible, and open organizations

Collaborative organizations appear at the crossroads of two symmetrical sociocultural trajectories. The first is the "rediscovery of collaboration" in both mature modern societies and recently modernized ones. The second trajectory is what is sometimes called the process of "social leapfrogging," and it is happening in the other parts of the world.

Regarding the first one, I say "rediscovery" because historically, before the process of individualization took place, these societies had centuries of experience with traditional forms of collaboration. The rediscovery of collaboration happens among social groups in which the process of individualization resulting from the crisis of traditions is most evident. At the same time, and probably for the same reasons, these are also the contexts in which new collaborative organizations have become most visible. In other words, it is here that a growing number of people, experiencing the difficulties of extreme individualization, decide to cooperate to solve problems or to open new possibilities. That is, they rediscover the power of doing things together.

Exactly how the resulting collaborative organizations appear depends, of course, on the specificity of contexts, results to be achieved, and personal motivation, but they also have some common denominators. The first and most evident one is that, in all of them, there are two drivers: the search for practical results (in doing things together) and the quest for cultural value (the value of sharing ideas and projects).

## Converging trajectories

Until recently, for collaborative organizations in mature modern societies and recently modernized ones, the quest for cultural value has been a ul uh in this picture has changed. On one hand, technical and organizational improvements have reduced the difficulty of access and increased the effectiveness of various collaborative organizations, thus reducing the need for strong cultural motivations (I will come back to this point in the following chapters). On the other hand, for a growing number of people in many places that have traditionally been the rich part of the world, the search for practical results is now tending to weigh more heavily. In fact, on finding themselves up against the current economic crisis, their needs are becoming the main drivers of behavioral change. Such people are seeking new ways of living simply because they cannot afford to continue living as they did andthey reconize in (omecollaborativeorganizations viable solutins o their present problems.14

Let's move on now to the second trajectory. This is the one that can be observed in regions where traditional communities still exist but where, facing new problems and exposed to global ideas, they are in a transitional phase. In these societies, we can observe groups of people who, instead of moving along the seemingly inevitable evolution toward modernization (a modernization in the form of extreme individualization), jump directly from traditional communities to new forms of collaborative organizations, blending traditional relationships with some degree of individual freedom.With this option we have social leapfrogging: a direct jump from traditional communities to "open organizations" and "collaboration by choice," avoiding the extreme individualization of mainstream, twentiethcentury modernity (box 4.4).

## Box 4.4

## Social leapfrogging

The expression social leapfrogging is an extension of the (until now) betterknown concept of technological leapfrogging, i.e., a direct jump from traditional technologies to the most advanced ones (one very clear case is the diffusion of mobile telephones in Africa, avoiding the landline phase).6 Social leapfrogging, by analogy, is the direct jump from a traditional community to a new form of collaborative organization. Examples of social leapfrogging can be found in countries defined as "emerging," such as China, India, and Brazil, but also in all the others, above all in Africa. In all these places, different traditional social forms can evolve into a new kind of community-by-choice, moving from traditional, closed and now fragile communities toward new, more open and more resilient ones. In several cases the use of mobile technologies and digital platforms has been crucial to creating brand-new forms of organization. Taking Africa as an example, we can note that the potential for social leapfrogging, and its connection with the diffusion of mobile technologies and digital platforms, are particularly tied to the notion of ubuntu: a specific and complex form of solidarity embedded in African cultures. Normally in African discourse this concept refers to traditional organizations. However, several new initiatives, many of them supported by digital devices, appear to be firmly linked to ubuntu traditions. Thus the same concept seems capable of inspiring design guidelines for new solutions.

## Diffuse social enterprises

Collaborative organizations can be very different, but each of them, to exist, requires a high degree of entrepreneurship on the part of the participants and operates as a kind of enterprise: a diffuse social enterprise producing both specific results and social quality.

It must be stressed that we are speaking here of a special kind of social enterprise. Unlike the mainstream vision of social enterprise, where the predominant figure is someone who does something for someone else, the characterizing aspect here is that everyone concerned is directly and actively involved in achieving the result that the enterprise itself sets out to reach. In other words, these are collaborative organizations, in which people are active in helping each other and in creating a commonly recognized value. A second important difference is that, although some of these new social enterprises deal with highly critical social problems (empowering marginalized social groups or caring for the seriously ill), their specificity lies in extending the concept of "social" to a wider area of daily life by proposing solutions that are also tangible examples of new ways of being and doing.

## Associations, services, and production enterprises

In practice, these social enterprises may play various roles, acting as citizens' associations, as social services, and also as new kinds of distributed and open production enterprise.

Collaborative associations are groups of people who work together to solve problems or open new possibilities (and who become co-producers of the results). Some examples of this category are groups of residents who transform an abandoned plot into a shared neighborhood garden; groups of people whoove cokng and whouse ther skillto cokraargergroup, dining together in one of the members' houses; groups of people who exchange mutual help in terms of time and skills; groups of elderly people and teachers who organize vegetable gardens for children in elementary schools.

Collaborative services are a particular kind of service where final users are actively involved and assume the role of service co-designers and co-producers. Some examples are houses where elderly people of different ages live in a resource-sharing community suited to their diverse needs and lifeple, where students find cheap, family-style accommodation while giving lonely but independent elderly people help, companionship, and financial supor;anizurral oupnfa,akn use of existing resources such as the capabilities (social resource) and houses (physical resource) of their parents.

Collaborative production enterprises are based on new models of production and distribution. In fact, the collaborative attitude of such organizations, when applied to production activities, is creating a new generation of small and micro production enterprises, endowed with special social value, ranging from advanced, high-tech ones (such as those proposed by Fab Labs and by the makers movement; see chapter 1) to those resulting from the renewal of traditional craftsmanship (in the emerging networked models of production) and of traditional farming (in the framework of the community-supported agriculture model).

## Prototypes, mature solutions, and implemented ones

At the origins of each new idea of collaborative organization there is a creative community:17 a group of people who have been able to imagine, develop, and manage it. With time, these creative communities evolve into our collaborative organizations which, if successful, continue to evolve as every innovation does.

More precisely, we can say that, like all innovation processes, collaborative organizations emerge, mature, and spread in an S curve from brandnew ideas to mature, implemented solutions.18

Among existing collaborative organizations, we can see that some of them are still at the prototype stage: they show that an idea is feasible and that somebody somewhere has been able to put it into practice. They might open up possibilities, but it is too early yet to know whether they will last over time and work independently of the special people who started them and/or the different contexts in which they have been created.

Other cases are relatively consolidated working solutions: they indicate that some solution ideas have been able to last over time and, sometimes, to inspire other groups of people in other places to do something similar. When they are successful these cases can be seen as social innovations that have been able to move on from the initial prototype stage to a more mature one. However, it is evident that they still require a very high investment in terms of time and attention on the part of the actors involved, and therefore people who are less motivated and less entrepreneurial may find it too difficult to start up similar initiatives, or even simply to participate in those that are already up and going.

Finally, some of the cases can be considered as mature, implemented solutions: collaborative organizations that are supported by specifically designed systems of products, services, and communication programs.

Some examples are very well known, for instance car sharing (a group of residents in a given area share a fleet of cars to be used and paid for only when required). Thanks to appropriate services and products, the adoption of specific innovative organizational models, and sometimes a mix of institutional interventions, this proposal has become easily accessible, effective, and replicable in different contexts. The more mature car sharing solutions can be accessed now by people who are not required to be exceptionally motivated. The same is true for those who want to start up such an activity as a new business opportunity. As this example (like other similar ones) shows, a growing number of collaborative organization ideas have been supported by designers, engineers, enterprises, and local institutions that have developed specific solutions to enable people to start up or participate in a collaborative organization.

Obviously, when this happens some of the characteristics of the initial invention and its early applications may be lost or modified. Car sharing is an emblematic example: the initial experience organized by a group of radicals, animated by a community spirit and severely critical of the dominant car culture, has developed into an easily accessible, highly effective service, the users of which generally recognize in it no particular social significance. I shall come back to this point in a later chapter; for the moment suffice it to say that as occurs in any other product or service development process, the ways by which to progress from an initial idea to a finished product or service are many. Thus the qualities and values that distinguish the original idea may evolve in different ways according to the development options chosen at each stage.

## Enabling ecosystems

Collaborative organizations are living organisms that require a favorable evioent o star, lastevolv ntoatue outis asrThey call for an ecosystem of cultural and social structures, ranging from technical infrastructure to national institutions and neighborhood associations; from global products and production-consumption systems to local ones. It follows that it is the characteristics of this ecosystem, an enabling ecosystem consisting of widely differing entities, operating on many different scales, that will decide the probabilities of a collaborative organization emerging and being successful.

Given that, what can expert design do to create a more favorable enabling ecosystem?

## Different logics and scales

Enabling ecosystems, like all ecosystems, are complex entities' that cannot be entirely changed with a single design project (i.e., with a single mode of intervention, based on a single way of thinking and seeing things). To change such an ecosystem requires a plurality  projects, perating - ferent levels and with different logics.

Taking the Collaborative Housing Program presented in chapter 3 as an example (though the same could be said for all the other examples in this book), we can recognize the existence of a general program and several quasi-independent projects. The program was based on views, hypotheses, and a methodological approach shared by a group of stakeholders. The specific projects varied widely: from the initial survey on the potential demand for collaborative housing in Milan, to the cultural activities aiming to promote the value of collaborative living, to the sets of services, digital platforms, and toolkits specifically conceived to support potential cohousers in the first phase, and social housing residents in the second.

Finally, we must add that the impact of this program and the projects it generated has been greater than the sum of its immediate results (in terms of the cohousing units and social-housing initiatives it triggered directly). Indeed, it has influenced other projects in various ways and has contributed to a more general cultural change in attitude toward housing and the value of sharing certain housing facilities and services. In short, not only have these various projects been part of a wider co-design process coordinated by the Collaborative Housing Program, but also the program and projects have together created favorable conditions for activating other projects at different scales, in a wider, more open and ultimately uncoordinated process of social co-designing.

This example clearly shows the distinction I introduced in chapter 3, between the overall design process (which is an open-ended process) and the multiplicity of design initiatives that enable the overall process to proceed. It also shows that every design initiative is a project in itself, with its own clearly defined results, modalities, and timelines.

Generalizing on what this example tells us, we can say that to create a more supportive environment it is necessary to move in different directions and with different attitudes. As a matter of fact, they may be very specific, local projects, targeting particular aspects of the enabling ecosystem, as for instance an ethnographic film about a cohousing community; a scenario to stimulate discussion about possible future nutrition; a method and tools by which to choose among various social service options; a prototype that tangibly demonstrates the feasibility of a proposal. But they may also be framework projects: second-level projects that seek to align, coordinate, and systemize a multiplicity of enabling solutions and pinpoint projects and thus to have an impact on the local area (at city or regional level), or on the great sociotechnical systems such as health, social services, education, food and nutrition, and so on.
