> 来源：Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 8 Making Things Effective and Meaningful

A collaborative organization is a group of people who have an idea about how to achieve something and who collaborate to put it into action. To do s, they use a set of material and cognitive artifacts that make being part of the organization easier or less so, more or less costly in practical terms, and more or less convincing in cultural terms. In other words: every collaborative organization entails a certain degree of difficulty, and every result it leads to has a certain degree of appeal. How can the first be reduced and the second increased? How can this organization become more effective for the people who are a part of it? How can it become more attractive? Expert design collaborates in response to these questions, and then it asks another: What is the relationship between the quest for effectiveness and the sense (particularly the social sense) of the initiative?

## Problem solving

When a collaborative organization is put into practice for the first time, the people involved work like bricoleurs:' the required artifacts are found among those that already exist; they are adapted in function and meaning and are finally put together to fit their new purpose. However, since the products and services used were not designed for that particular purpose, putting them together leads to rather inefficient organizations, calling for a high degree of personal commitment by promoters and participants. The result is that the organizations are acceptable only to those who are very highly motivated. Experience tells us that these initial applications of an idea can be seen as working prototypes. If the ideas are good, an innovative process starts from here and the prototypes evolve toward more advanced ways of functioning. The latter are based on product and service systems specifically designed and systemized to make the initial idea more accessible, effective, and flexible, and thus easier to implement and keep going.

## Accessibility, effectiveness, and flexibility

Let's take the example of car sharing. We have already said (chapter 4) that, over time, this proposal has become easily accessible, effective, and replicable in different contexts. Now we can add that all this has been made possible by an innovation process that has been going on for decades, in which various parts of the enabling solution have been redefined bit by bit. Thirty years ago the original idea (a group of people living in a given area who share a fleet of cars to be used and paid for only when required) was developed using standard cars, a telephone, paper and pen, and a lot of willpower.

Since then, the innovation process has improved the components, from the immaterial ones to the material ones. Digital platforms and dedicated applications now enable users to find the nearest cars, and to book them after checking fuel or battery charge levels. By modifying onboard equipment, solutions have been developed by which clients can use their member cards as keys to open the chosen car.2 Existing cars have been adapted for this use and new ones have also been specially designed for the purpose.³ It should be added that alongside this evolutionary line, which has made the initial car sharing model more accessible and effective, another, more innovative one has started proposing a radically different organizational model. This is peer-to-peer car sharing,\* where the fleet of cars consists of privately owned but little used cars that are made available for other users. This solution has been made possible by dedicated applications and websites that directly link demand to offer in real time. In this way, car sharing produces economic, social, and environmental value by transforming temporarily unused cars into a new local resource.

This observation highlights the way in which the initial car sharing prototype has evolved in very different directions in terms of function, cost, and behavior required of the actors involved. This variety in ways of solving the basicproblem is very iportant,becuse it dres dfrent ocal groups with differing functional requirements. For instance, one modality (such as Zipcar) may be more suitable for longer journeys, whereas another (such as Car2Go) lends itself to short urban trips. A third modality (Buzzcar) is an example of peer-to-peer car sharing that makes privately owned cars available while temporarily not in use, and offers cheaper solutions (example 8.1).

We can also observe that while the first two cases (Zipcar and Car2Go) h organization, proposes an innovative solution not only in terms of its ecoimoel but alsas rar he ole,behavio,a cltual ate required of users and car owners.

## Example 8.1

## THE CAR SHARING EVOLUTION

The first application of the car sharing idea was Stattauto in Berlin in 1. It worked by telephoneand paper and pen. Nowadays car sharing has become an tli et kinds of function, including booking, paying, and car door opening. Thanks to t al olv  if , have appeared worldwide. For instance:

hlare caharaniztwowi. Iu 810,000 members and offered 10,000 vehicles throughout the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Spain, and Austria. It uses a rangeof different vce sitable orvarious use incuding ong-istancejours).

Car2Go made its first appearance in 2008. In 2013 it had 400,000 members and 8,0 vehicles in 3 cities in Europe and North America. It is a service designed o     y fitted-out Smart). All operations are carri out through the personal member ard.

Buzzcar is a peer-to-peer car sharing organization based in France. The idea is that existing car owners can make their vehicles available for others to rent for short periods of time. The service is affordable for the users and brings some money to the participating car owners. Cars can be found, booked, and paid for through the dedicated Buzzcar app.

Lastly, we must remember that the development of car sharing and its enabling solutions has followed that of bike sharing, where all that has been said thus far about cars has already been happening for some time. In fact, bike sharing has also developed along two evolutionary trajectories: one that has led to the realization of products and services (bikes and systems of parking, payment, and fleet management) designed and systemized for this specific purpose,8 and one that has moved toward peer-to-peer bike sharing, using privately owned bikes and the potential of the Internet and the applications that work with it.

## Enabling solutions

Generalizing from the previous examples, we can say that collaborative organizations have gradually evolved from putting products and services found on the market together into a rough system to using enabling solutions: product and service systems that have been specifically designed for that purpose. More precisely, enabling solutions are product-service systems1 providing cognitive, technical, and organizational instruments that increase people's capacities to achieve a result they value.

The main aim of enabling solutions, on the problem-solving side, is to make collaborative organizations more accessible and effective: firstly by reducing the intensity of personal investment required, and secondly by increasing the benefit people can get by participating and becoming co-producers (i.e., improving their user-centered effectiveness: effectiveness evaluated from the point of view of the user, spurring the user to become a co-producer).

In practical terms, to do this means identifying a collaborative organization's functional demands, breaking these down into their basic elements, and proposing one or more solutions for each element (solution components). Given the diversity of application fields and of the ways in which one can operate, these components may differ widely. Nevertheless, certain components are quite widely diffused among the different enabling solutions. A list of them clearly indicates the variety of material and immaterial artifacts that can be used, and the variety of specific design competences that are required (box 8.1).

Among these enabling solution components, a very special role is played by digital platforms," the spread of which has led to the emergence of a

## Box 8.1

## The main components of enabling solutions

Digital platforms to connect people and to make it easier for collaborative organizations to function smoothly (such as customized and intelligent booking and ordering systems, tracking and tracing technologies, fluid payment systems);

Flei a hat     ci  i publie functions (and as incubators for the tart-up ase;

Logistical services to support the new producer-consumer networks;

itizens'agences acting as catalysts for new grassroots initiatives, but also s facilitators to help existing ones grow, multiply, and flourish;

Information services to deliver specific advice when new procedures and/or new technologies have to be integrated;

Co-design tools and methodologies to conceive and develop the abovementione artifactsin acollaborative way.

new generation of enabling solutions that is changing the functionality and, in many ways, the very nature of many collaborative organizations. In fact, these platforms not only increase the effectiveness of activities that could have been carried out by other means (organizing meetings, updating agendas, enabling long-distance conversations); they also open totally new opportunities, making results feasible that were previously unimaginable. A good example of this is everything that concerns the traceability of people and things and the possibility of finding out "who is where" in real time. This information can be crucial in several cases (among them, as we have seen, the car and bike sharing examples, in which traceability enables users to find out where the nearest car or bike is parked).

In conclusion, we can see that a given idea for a collaborative organization can evolve together with its enabling solution in a single process of social-technical innovation. This process may lead to bifurcations and thus proposals that differ widely in their constructional components and in the type of collaborative encounter they are based on. It follows that expert design plays an important role in defining the various steps of this process, particularly in those where the adoption of new solutions entails substantial modifications in the nature of the entire organization, whether with regard to its effectiveness or its social and cultural meaning.

The process would seem to lead from working prototypes of collaborative organizations, which call for a huge practical commitment and therefore strong motivation and a marked disposition for creating communities, to ways of functioning in which facilitated participation makes possible a reduced motivational requirement. The people who pursued car sharing initiatives in Europe in the nineties (though the example could be extended to all successful cases of collaborative organization) undoubtedly did so with the idea of solving their own problem, but they also very clearly did so as a piece of everyday political action, with an eye to changing urban mobility and making the city more sustainable. Today participating in car sharing no longer requires such great social or environmental motivation. This does not mean that such motivations have altogether disappeared. It means instead that they have evolved and appear in different forms. Closer observation shows us that when a collaborative organization evolves and appears in different operational modalities (based on as many enabling solutions), it also appears with different meanings, and therefore calls for different mixes of motivations. Discussion of how this comes about is, in my opinion, of great importance.

## Sense making

As we have seen in the examples, some collaborative organizations can be made more effective by redesigning existing products and services. But a lot of what should be done is on the soft side of the solution, conceiving and developing new services that make them more accessible and effective. For instance, much may be done to enhance people's capabilities (e.g., by providing necessary information and knowledge) or give them greater flexibility (and therefore more possibility of coping with the increasing complexity of contemporary life).

At the same time, the enabling solution can incorporate different economic models such as those of the gift economy, mutual help, and doit-yourself. Finally, and most importantly, it can support different social and cultural values and can therefore be considered within different frameworks of meaning, whether it is acceptable to them or not.

## Local results and broad visions

When introducing social innovation, we have seen that collaborative organizations are not driven by the simple question: "How can we fulfill our needs?," but rather by the larger one: "How can we achieve the life we want to live?"

Even though collaborative organizations solve specific problems, they also make reference to broader visions of the lives participants want to live and, very importantly, to what has to be done to move in that direction. Therefore, people's motivation to actively participate in a collaborative organization is also based on these large visions and on the ability of enabling solutions to make these visible and tangible in a specific initiative in a specific place and time.

It follows that a collaborative organization can be made more meaningul, and therefore attractive, by working on two levels: on projects that aim to make the general context more favorable, creating large frameworks of meaning (as discussed in the previous chapter); and on enabling solutions, which I am dealing with now and which can be designed considering attentively their sense-making side. It should be noted that there is a double bond between the two levels. The meaning of the organizations and of their enabling solutions is largely defined by the cultural context in which they appear. At the same time, by giving visibility and tangibility to new ideas, these organizations and their enabling solutions create a more favorable context for other initiatives. That is, they produce a cultural environment in which new initiatives, working in the same direction, are more likely to emerge.

The case of the Slow Food organization is a very clear example of that. It indicates the importance of larger visions in developing and multiplying local organizations, and vice versa. Proposing broad ideas on food and agriculture, and on the very notions of time and quality, it creates a favorable context for a multiplicity of independent but coherent initiatives. At the same time, proposing and enhancing a variety of local activities, from its original Convivia and Presidia to farmers' markets and community-supported agriculture projects, it offers both citizens and farmers a practical and immediate experience of a different but viable world: a world in which food is organic and local, in which more direct and rich relationships are established between country and city and, most importantly, between farmers and citizens. These two aspects—being the tangible face of a more general idea, and happening in a socially rich way—are, to my mind, the two fundamental components that make this initiative meaningful and therefore attractive.

Generalizing on what this example teaches us, we can say that collaborative organizations become attractive when they offer a foretaste of a general vision, or at least of parts of it, in the participants' actual lives, which could be seen as putting into practice Gandhi's famous phrase, "be the change you wish to see in the world."

## Sociality and constructed conviviality

For people participating in a collaborative organization, the change they wish to anticipate concerns both the results and the ways to achieve them. The latter are very often marked by a distinctive feature of collaborative organizations: they occur in a "socially rich" way. This means that they tend to "produce society."

However, as we have observed, when they move on from the original creative communities to more mature organizations, they do not always do so in the same way. When these organizations are still based on informal, face-to-face relationships, the production of sociality is more or less natural: a kind of by-product of their main activity. But this cannot be taken for granted when interactions are more formal or when they mainly take place online. While car sharing and bike sharing, for example, were highly social in their initial, heroic stage, they are not necessarily so in maturity. At this stage sociality is produced if the preconditions for sociality have been designed, meaning if the enabling solution allows for and cultivates opportunities for socially rich interactions. To discuss this further, we shall focus on the concept of sociality: "the extent to which a system can give uppo

The terms sociality and sociability have been widely used in the research field of human-computer interaction and can usefully be extended to our discussion of collaborative organizations. Eun Ji Cho, who studied this topic for her doctoral thesis at the Politecnico di Milano, writes: "The beneficial role of sociability has been illustrated in various studies, ranging from social bonding and the support of joint problem-solving in the work environment, to creating common ground, reciprocity, trust."13 Her research examined some guidelines for producing tools with which to design for sociality in sociotechnical systems.14 Given that social behavior cannot be designed, the practical issue becomes how to create conditions that will make socially rich relations both possible and probable. It is not a simple question. The creation of sociality in collaborative organizations entails going well beyond the traditional user-friendliness of sociotechnical systems and discussions about supplier/client relations. What we must produce are, to use an expression of Nicolas Bourriaud, moments of constructed conviviality."s This means that, when talking about the sociality and attractiveness of collaborative organizations, our point of reference is not marketing but rather the depth of human relations. Indeed it might be useful to reread Ivan Illich and his Tools for Conviviality16 with the eyes and sensitivity of today, and try to put it into practice. It seems to me that what we need is a new design culture able to catch the profound sense of sociality, or rather of the various forms of sociality that we would like to be produced. How can this culture be created? In my view, the main road in this case too is the reciprocal fertilization of experience and theoretical reflection.

One example of what this might mean can be seen in the collaborative living project developed by Liat Rogel for her doctoral thesis at the Politecnico di Milano.1 The field activity for this research project led to the promotion and realization of a pilot example of collaborative living (example 8.2).

The intention of the project was to promote socialization and sustainable ways of living among the inhabitants of a new condominium. To this end, a program of activities was developed supported by a digital platform. The research component of the project was to verify and reflect on the application of the concept of sociability as constructed conviviality. The result was positive and interesting. It verified that forms of socialization were indeed initiated which otherwise would probably not have happened. This occurred through a program of shared activities and thanks to a digital platform which the residents gradually appropriated, making it the instrument of their activity and socialization.

## Example 8.2

## VIA SCARSELLINI": A COLLABORATIVE LIVING PROJECT, MILAN

— ways of livingamong residents of an apartment block of10households locatein research thesis at the Politecnico di Milano.18

From 2010 to 2013, a number of design activities were carried out to achieve nmental asl ustainabilitynheeveryday pepleivig same apartment block. Several initiatives were promoted, and a digital platform was created that aimed to coordinate them and create friendly relationships among residents. The platform allowed residents who originally did not know each other to meet virtually, participate in the various forums, and start shared initiatives, including co-designing new services. The research part of the project enabled results to be evaluated from different points of view. After three years of activities, the interactions and collaborative activities among neighbors played a beneficial role in conceiving and enhancing socially and environmentally positive initiatives. More precisely, they created a sense of community (increasing the opportunities for mutual help), they permitted goods and services to be shared, energy to be saved, costs to be reduced, and several daily activities to be facilitated, and finally they increased the number and variety of available collaborative services (thanks to the co-design of common spaces and facilities).

This positive result also led to other interesting surprises. "Our hypothesis," write Cho and Rogel, "was that socialization between people would be a motor for future collaboration. However, socialization between members started to occur gradually as the discussion on concrete initiatives took place. In other words, introducing each other and knowing their future neighbors, which was thought to be the principal purpose of this platform, was achieved only after many initiatives were proposed and discussed."19 This gives a clear and tangible picture of what the expression constructed conviviality could mean: it is a conviviality that is built by doing things together; in other words, by activating initiatives that become in themselves the field on which this kind of growth is cultivated.

## Trust building

To conclude with a consideration that underlies everything I have been saying thus far about collaborative organizations and enabling solutions: for whatever reason people decide to meet and do something together, each participant must have a conviction that the others will honor the commitment. They must trust each other. Indeed, reciprocal trust is the fundamental ingredient of any kind of collaboration and therefore of social organizations. The more such organizations are built on free participant choice (rather than on tradition or coercion), and the more turbulent the environment in which they live (where people who meet are for the most part strangers), the more essential the trust factor becomes. Since this is exactly the situation in which collaborative organizations find themselves working, every discussion on how to foster and support them, and therefore on what enabling solutions to propose, is in practice about how to foster and support reciprocal trust among those who could and would like to take part.

The issue of trust and trust building is enormous and certainly goes well beyond the possibilities and intentions of this book. However, some basic consideration must be given to it, and therefore some design guidelines, if we are to discuss collaborative organizations (social forms in which all the participants are called to invest time, energy, and attention) and what design can do to foster and sustain them.

As always, we shall start from experience. In this as in other aspects, observation of various cases of social innovation has shown us that it is necessary to distinguish between the initial phase and subsequent ones. At the origin of every collaborative organization (or at least of those that start from the bottom up) there is a creative community: a group of people who know one another well and trust each other (because they have had the chance to do things together). Later, as the organization matures, the olvoeherhe a become weaker, and trust building can no longer depend on direct acquaintance. Other ways must be found. In fact, the organizations that last over time and spread are those that have, in one way or another, managed to solve this problem. In a study on how collaborative organizations can be supported in the creation of mutual trust, Fang Zhong defined two main deig strategies: "o diffuse inforation inan effective,genuine,traspent way (to give participants the clearest ideas of how things work and who is doing what) and to create an informal social control system (for example, a reputation system)."2

The first strategy leads to the designing of system elements in a way that increases their visibility. One way is to "make visible" (through appropri-municativeartiacts)whatis not vsible in tselaccountsori ram hev y visibility of the organization itself and its functioning. Nowadays the simplest way, but also the most simplistic, is to use new technology to make the whole organization visible in real time: places, people who live there, the activities they do there. In some cases, when used well, this way (which we can call the hypervisibility strategy) can be very effective. However, it is important to understand its limits, which are in part the limits of what a video camera can actually see and what the cameraman decides to show. The most serious limit, however, is the risk that this hypervisibility will create anxiety on the part of both the viewer and the viewed.

A more mature strategy would be one that uses a multiplicity of tools, deciding on the best mix for each situation: occasions can be created for face-to-face meetings, or encounters using the communicative artifacts mentioned before. Formal checks can be made by someone recognized as a guarantor in the various issues. Innovative ways that have emerged in recent years can be set up using the Internet to create trust between people who, until that moment, were strangers (online reputation building). Finally, it is essential that people be motivated to do things together.

I think that the last is the most important line to follow. We have seen this when talking about creating sociality and conviviality, but the same considerations apply in relation to trust: it is essential that a positive loop be created between doing something together and cultivating social ties, in this case trust relationships between people. Of course this positive loop cannot be entirely planned. However, the enabling solution can also generate conditions to make it more likely.
