> 来源：Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio)\Design, when everybody designs an introduction to design for social innovation (Manzini, Ezio).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 9 Making Things Replicable and Connected

Collaborative organizations are important because they are concrete teps toward sustainable ways of living and because they offer viable solutions to large, urgent, intractable contemporary problems. To be truly effective and have the needed impact on the overall society, they should spread and drive changes at a larger scale. Is this possible? If it is, can they have such a great impact while continuing to maintain their characteristic human ae Inhor:can collabotivanizatins havehecpacian the world while remaining small? Today, in the age of networks, the answer to all these questions is yes. But, for this to happen, innovative strategies must be enhanced and a larger framework vision must emerge.

## Small, local, open, connected

Some 40 years ago, when E. F. Schumacher wrote his famous book Small Is Beautiful, he made a choice in favor of the small and local on cultural and ethical grounds as a reaction to the prevailing trend toward greater scale and delocalization that he saw around him.' Today we follow Schumacher for these and other, new and compelling reasons. However, at the same time, we have to recognize that in these four decades things have changed profoundly. What was only a utopia in Schumacher's day is today a concrete possibility, offered by the convergence between networked systems and creative communities. Forty years ago the "small" that Schumacher referred to was genuinely small, because it had little chance of influencing the larger scale, and the local was really local, because it was partly isolated from other local communities. Furthermore, at that time all the technological and economic trends were moving in the opposite direction, that is, in the direction of "bigger and better." Today the context is strikingly different, since the small can now be influential as a node in the larger global network and the local can now also be open to the global flows of people, ideas, and information. In other words, we can say that today the small is no longer small and the local is no longer local, at least in traditional terms.

## Small is not small, in the net

This change in the nature of the small and local has enormous implications: not only do the new networks make it possible to operate on a local and small scale in very effective ways, but also the flexible systems they generate provide the only possibility for operating safely in the complex, fastchanging, highly risky contemporary environment. The keyword for this promising perspective is distributed systems: sociotechnical systems made of a variety of interconnected elements and therefore capable of adapting and lasting through time.2

As I mentioned in chapter 1, over recent decades a set of new trends has emerged and in some cases spread, driven by different waves of innovation:3 that of distributed intelligence, with the radical changes in sociotechnical organizations that this has made viable; that of distributed power generation and, more generally, of distributed infrastructure; and finally that of distributed production, ranging from the zero-mile food trend to the one toward new fabrication models. The result is that today it is possible to imagine a new and viable form of globalization as a mesh of distributed economies and connected localities. In the same chapter I observed how these distributed systems are strongly based on technological innovation but that, when they spread, their technological side cannot be separated from the social one; that, therefore, no distributed system can be implemented without social innovation.

It follows that, in this case, technical and social innovation reinforce each other, creating a virtuous circle that leads to practical opportunities and new ideas on society, production, and quality of life. In short, they permit us to outline a viable scenario for a sustainable society.

## The SLOC Scenario

Social innovation and distributed systems are the main pillars of an emergini will calth  nall, a, connected. These four adjectives together outline this scenario's characteristis. Individually, each adjective and its implications are easily understood, but together they generate a new vision of how a sustainable, networked society could take shape. In my view, this SLOC scenario could become a powerful social attractor, capable of triggering, catalyzing, and orienting a variety social actors, innovative processes, and design activities.

More precisely, on the basis of what has been said so far, we can see that the SLOC scenario is neither a dream nor a forecast for the future. It is a reasoned, motivating vision of what the future could be like if a large number of social actors operated to reinforce and synergize ongoing trends.Given all that, we can say that the SLOC scenario proposes a possible future, though it is a future that requires many converging efforts if it is to become real. First of all, it requires answers to the questions we started from: How can the impact of such small initiatives as collaborative organizations be increased? How can they grow without losing their collaborative nature? Of course, the scenario per se does not give the answers, but, in my view, it does give a general vision that permits us to align different initiatives in a common framework and indicates two main basic strategies, which can be summarized as replicating and connecting.

Replicating is the first strategy that, in a connected world, leads small and local activities to have large-scale effects: it is in fact the main way to scale up within the SLOC scenario. The idea of replicating may appear to be, and in certain aspects it is, the opposite of experimenting. However, in my view the two practices can and must be complementary. In the transition it is necessary to experiment, and then consolidate and propagate (i.e., replicate) the best results. What is more, in a complex, changing world, the replica is also always an adaptation to new circumstances, to the new context.6 In other words, every replica is also a design of a new and locally appropriate solution. Replicating is an activity that requires diffuse design capacity. But undoubtedly it also entails the presence of experts: experts in assessing the quality of the experiments and therefore choosing which to replicate, and experts in designing ways of replicating them and tools to enable this to happen.

Connecting is the second main strategy thanks to which small and local activities may have large-scale impacts. In fact, these impacts come not only from the accumulation of a large number of small projects but also, and above all, from the multiplying effect that can be produced by connecting them in an appropriate way. This effect can be achieved in two modalities. The first is to create a connecting infrastructure, leaving local project promoters to find the best ways to connect, coordinate, and synergize. In this case, the strategy consists in offering connecting possibilities and creating a favorable environment for new initiatives to emerge and autonomously connect (chapter 7). The second modality to enhance the connecting strategy consists in realizing appropriate framework projects. These are suites of specifically conceived initiatives capable of stimulating new local projects and facilitating their collaborations and synergies. To do that, large coalitions are needed, capable of steering the overall process: their existence is in fact the precondition for producing the shared visions and the practical instruments which can make this strategy practically viable.

In conclusion, while in the past century increasing the impact of small, local initiatives inevitably led to an increase in size and bureaucratic structures, today, in the age of networks, there are other possibilities: scaling out (or horizontal scaling) done by replicating small initiatives in different contexts, and updating the traditional; and scaling up (or vertical scaling), which today can be achieved by integrating and synergizing several small projects into larger programs. It can be done by connecting them horizontally with similar or complementary initiatives, and vertically with other types of organization (social, economic, and political).

## Replicating as scaling out

Each individual case of collaborative organization that we may find anywhere in the world, like a cohousing initiative in Milan, car sharing in Berlin, a farmers' market in New York, or community-based agriculture in China, cannot in itself be reproduced, because it is so deeply rooted in a specific context and so largely shaped by the characteristics of its promoters. Nevertheless, each of these highly localized cases is the practical realization of an idea: the idea of cohousing, of car sharing, of farmers' markets, of community-based agriculture. These ideas outline their motivations and how they work (i.e., their systemic architecture). Therefore, when we discuss how to replicate collaborative organizations, we are in reality discussing how these ideas may spread and how different groups of people may recognize, adopt, and localize them (that is, adapt them to different contexts).

## Moving ideas and network effect

Until now, the diffusion of these ideas, and their subsequent localization, has mainly happened in a spontaneous way. But it has been the spontaneous diffusion typical of the connected world: a world where ideas circulate rapidly, peer to peer, with no need for an intermediary. It is precisely this direct communication between peers, in real time and independent of distance, that makes the circulation of ideas today (including those regarding collaborative organizations) different from that of the past, and this difference is not only in quantity (more ideas, in less time and over greater distances) but alsoin qualy.

Not only do ideas of collaborative organization circulate rapidly all over the planet, but they also create totally new effects. The first (which we talked about in chapters 1 and 2) is the growth in numbers of expert users able to transmit a promising idea effectively and, above al, to recognize and implement it (in the sense that they have the sensitivity, the design capability and skills, and the entrepreneurship to do so). It is clear that the presence of these subjects at the nodes of the network increases the ease and effectiveness with which the ideas can circulate and the collaborative organizations can replicate.

A second characteristic of the spontaneous diffusion of ideas in a connected world is the importance of the network $e f f e c t { : } ^ { 8 }$ a phenomenon that is not specific to the current phase but that has a strong impact on it. In general terms the network effect means that each new node added to the network (that is, every new idea of collaborative organization) benefits all the other nodes (all the other collaborative organizations). This means that every new collaborative organization reinforces the overall idea more than its individual weight would lead us to expect (box 9.1).

In our case, in the strict sense of the term this is true for some types of collaborative organization (for example, each new participant in a time

## Box 9.1

## Network effect

The expression network effect refers to what happens in systems in which an increase in number of participants leads to a direct increase in value for other users. The classic example is the telephone: the more people who own a telephone, the greater the benefit for everybody.

In a digitally connected world this effect is both wider-reaching and more important. Online social networks like Twitter and Facebook, which become more useful as more users join, are a good example. However, the same thing happens for platforms that manage exchange or mutual help operations. These may range from local currency exchange to house exchange, the time bank, or carpooling.

Adopting the term in a wider sense, we can say that the network effect occurs in all collaborative organizations. Every new application of the idea of car sharing, cohousing, or farmers' markets makes the enabling ecosystem more favorable (both in terms of regulations and political policies, and of the availability of dedicated products and services). Furthermore each initiative reinforces the idea itself and impacts on the motivations of those participating, and of those who might join in and participate.

bank or in a carpooling service makes the overall service more effective), but in a wider sense it is always true. A sort of cultural network effect occurs whereby each new application reinforces a shared vision and makes new sense of it. This is very significant: the expectations of potential participants about what a given collaborative organization may become in future are decisive in their decision to take part. In fact, every new idea implemented consolidates expectations about its potential for success and reinforces the determination of others to join in. In other words, it acts as a self-fulfilling prophecy: a potential future that comes true because a lot of people believed in it.

In view of this, expert design can operate to foster the spontaneous circulation of ideas, and can use its tools to increase their visibility and the clarity with which they express their content (chapter 5). At the same time, it can collaborate to multiply the number of people who are able to act as expert users (and are therefore able not only to recognize the good ideas, but also to put them into practice). So it is a question of collaborating to make the general environment more favorable, and then just letting things happen. This type of intervention, which we can call indirect, is not the only way that expert design can participate: it can also intervene directly by designing toolkits specifically for the purpose of replicating given ideas.

## Toolkits for communities

Creating conditions to make a specific collaborative organization replicable is a design initiative based on the same presuppositions as those introduced in relation to enabling solutions. Here, too, it is a question of delivering a set of products and services that make applying an idea of collaborative organization easier and more effective. However, whereas in the previous cah ticular context, now we must look at how these enabling solutions can be designed to replicate a collaborative organization in different contexts. For this same reason, the enabling solution itself must be designed as a packet of components that are themselves reproducible and easy to distribute.

In many aspects thisis not a new issue, and it can be seen as an extension of the traditional idea of the toolkit. A community-oriented toolkit is a replicable enabling solution conceived tosupport different groups of people in recognizing and applying a collaborative organization idea bydapting it to the specificity of their own contexts (box 9.2).

Today, for several reasons, both the traditional idea of a toolkit and the new, community-oriented one are spreading, and their role is growing in v vaolk vy

## Box 9.2

## Toolkits and capacity building

Traditionally, a toolkit consists of a set of tangible and intangible tools conceived and produced to make a specific task easier, so that even nonexperts can do it. Until now, they have been (mainly) conceived for individual selfhelp. In order to support collaborative organizations, they must evolve to include community-oriented toolkits as well. This evolution takes place in a context that is itself evolving in response to various ongoing trends and in particular the tendency toward individualization, with self-help as one of its expressions, and the growing number of user-experts (people who although not professionals in a given field are still able to perform within it). All this obviously influences the nature and purposes of toolkits, moving them on from the ambit of the interesting but marginal to the central and fundamental issue of capacity building. In other words, returning to the theme introduced by Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen, it leads to the design question of how to increase people's capability of being what they wish to be and doing what they wish to do. We therefore extend the concept of toolkit to everything that helps people to do things themselves: not only to solve problems but also to bring their capabilities into play in the sense intended by Nussbaum and Sen.

simple initiatives, such as organizing events (a neighborhood festival or the collective clean-up of a public place),1 while others have involved more complex, long-lasting activities. For example, there are community-based toolkits for health (ranging from the prevention of childhood obesity in the United States to the prevention of malaria in Africa)" and for do-ityourself building (including community energy systems and community water management).12

As these examples indicate, toolkits must be carefully designed to meet the needs of clearly defined target users with their actual capacities and motivations. All that we have said in relation to enabling solutions also applies to the design of toolkits, with the additional fact that, to become toolkits, they must themselves be replicable and must be totally self-standing. This means they must be usable by everybody (or more precisely, by everybody within the identified target group) without requiring further assistance.

It is in this last aspect, in their being a set of instruments which, once made generally available, will be used by everyone as they see fit, that the strength and also the weakness of this strategy lies. In fact, as we have already seen with reference to the special toolkits conceived for supporting co-design processes (chapter 7), the strategy's strength lies in the fact that, if properly communicated and easily accessible, there are no limits to a toolkit's possible employment. For the same reason, whoever uses a toolkit will find himself or herself having to deal with the problems alone (or rather, only being able to use the expert knowledge contained within the toolkit itself): hence the strategy's weakness.

In addition, and this seems to me to be a more pressing issue (and one less easily solved by improving the toolkit), the toolkit may support the operations of an initiative (i.e., the accessibility and effectiveness of the collaborative organization it is intended to start up), but it is unlikely to reinforce users' motivations to act and their trust in the toolkit's possibilities: adopting the toolkit strategy means assuming that the user/co-producer already possesses these in their entirety. And this may in fact not be the case. The risk, therefore, is that toolkits will be used badly, due to lack of knowledge, or will not be used at all, due to lack of motivation. This brings us to a more general question: the issue of capacity building, which underlies the whole of this argument, cannot be dealt with using one single type of intervention. This means that the capacity of people and communities cannot be increased from the bottom up only, by distributing dedicated toolkits. It is necessary to combine different kinds of intervention, based on different strategies. It follows that the toolkits we are talking about must be part of a wider set of services and communicative artifacts that compete not only to foster their own good use, but also to reinforce motivations to use them.

When this happens, when toolkits are managed within this wider set of uo t hat  n, l

## Social franchising

Social franchising is the application of the principles of commercial franchising to promote larger social benefits. For our purposes (the replication of promising collaborative organizations), it is a replication strategy by which a given body (the franchisor)offers an ide collaborativeorganization and the procedures for implementing and managing it (the equivalent of a tool-rperatorshnise) who nplement  ocy

In practice, the franchisor offers others, who are autonomous operators, a series of supports. These may be large-scale communication campaigns and communicative artifacts usable at a local level, services in a strict sense (professional training and professional advice), dedicated equipment (if and when necessary, or guarantes of the quality that will eventually be prouced Soef what is provideis what could gointoa tolki, u there is something more: the integrated motivation and trust offered by the more far-reaching communication of a familiar, valued brand and of opportune quality control services.

Social franchising can be presented in various forms, with the central organization playing a more or less weighty role. We can take the organizing of a neighborhood festivity as an example of "light" franchising. There is an international association called European Neighbors Day15 which works in this field, often drawing in local institutions. It operates on two levels: making a toolkit available to groups of residents, containing all that is required to organize the festivity; and developing wider communication on the theme of quality of life in cities (indicating a special day on which to organize the event). In this way it tends to support the organizers and all the participants, making them feel part of a wider project. Thus, making the neighborhood more livable for a day is also a way of promoting a new idea of urban sociality, and therefore a more sustainable city.

Other cases call for a higher level of integration. Tyze (discussed in chapter 4) is a good example. It is a social enterprise that seeks to organize a help network of relatives, friends, and neighbors available to lend a hand (but who could not do so alone) to people in need of care. To promote this idea and the possibility of putting it into practice, Tyze offers the potential group dedicated software and instructions for use (in practice a toolkit), integrated with a set of complementary support services in case of need (to make the network reliable) and the use of the brand (to create trust).

Together these examples offer important guidelines for designing such entities. When the activity to be promoted does not present particular problems or risks (like the organization of a neighborhood street party or a clean-up day for a public place), the "pure toolkit" model can be used, or the one of "light franchising." As the problems to be dealt with become more complex and delicate, however, it becomes more necessary to enrich the offer: to find a balance between what the base groups can do on their own, counting on their own efforts and a supporting toolkit, and what must be done with the help of external, expert bodies that integrate the missing knowledge, guarantee the achievement of determined quality standards, and thus raise trust within and outside the group.

## Connecting as scaling up

Like processes of replication, those of connection may happen without further external help—if the environment is favorable. That is, local organization promoters may be able to connect and coordinate horizontally with peers, and vertically with other, larger actors, and in this way trigger changes on various scales. However, experience tells us that in order to attain great transformations, it is almost always necessary for entities with the means and circumstances to act on a large scale, intervening with top-down actions alongside the peer-to-peer, bottom-up initiatives.

## Horizontal and vertical connections

Democratic Psychiatry and Slow Food (the two Italian examples of social innovation with a big impact that I introduced in chapter 3) are excellent instances of how this can happen in practice. The key to their success, as we saw, has been their capacity to promote and coordinate a multiplicity of initiatives, ranging from local to national, in the framework of a single great vision. It is this multilevel strategy that has enabled Democratic Psychiatry to change a great, complex institution (that of psychiatry) and Slow Food to trigger a process of transformation in the entire agro-food system.

Some decades later, the lesson that these examples teach us is still valid. However, we need to update the picture in view of what has happened in the meantime, in particular bearing in mind the growth in connectivity and the vitality of diffuse social innovation. This can be described, in a nutshell, as a general reinforcement of the peer-to-peer component in the mix of actions capable of producing great changes.

Talking about networked governance, we have already seen how this kind of strategy is changing public agencies with the aim of "aligning the public sector with the 21st century. Similar processes are under way in various other fields: one of the most evident is that already mentioned of food networks and the relationship between city and country, to which Slow Food has made a significant contribution but which, undoubtedly, and fortunately, is today fed by the converging activities of a growing number of actors. At varying levels of development, and with greater or lesser visibility, something similar is happening in other fields of activity in which the peer-to-peer and bottom-up dynamics of collaborative organizations meet the top-down dynamics of more advanced public agencies, ranging from mobility to health care; from care of the elderly to the local and regional development.

The common denominator  theenitiative is that the are dacal, open-ende esinprocees that emerge in the collaborative and/rnonistic interaction of a multiplicity of organizations, bodies, enterprises, an prvateczns. In rail ters, they eveop cal project ydinating andsystemizing them t a largerteritorial scale neighbooods, cities, regions) and/or in relation to larger complex systems (health care, education, administration, and so on).

For instance, when an urban, rural, or regional program is concerned, its enhancement can be triggered and supported by a set of self-standing but coordinated local initiatives. Similarly, when the challenge is to transform a complex organization (be it a public administration, health care, or a school system), the process can be prepared, started, and oriented by launching a number of local initiatives to mobilize the whole organization and make it more effective.

In short, each large-scale project based on the connecting strategy presents a similar architecture. There is a multiplicity of local projects promoted, aligned, and synergized by a framework one, where the local projects are self-standing initiatives, deeply rooted in the specifics of the local situation and therefore capable of making best possible use of existing physical and social resources to achieve tangible results quickly. At the same time, since they are aligned and synergized by the framework project, they are also drivers of larger change. The framework project is a design and communication initiative including scenarios (to give different local projects a common direction), strategies (to indicate how to implement scenarios), and specific supporting activities (to systemize the local projects, to empower them, and to communicate the overall project).

The connecting strategy enables large-scale programs to be conceived and developed that are intrinsically extremely flexible, scalable, and adaptable in time: a strategy that is particularly appropriate in turbulent times (like those we are now living in) and when regional systems or large organizations are involved. It is also called planning by projects,' a point I will come back to in the next chapter.
