> 来源：Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.)\Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Feminist border thinking

Global coloniality, as our biographies start to show, traps us all and does not allow us to be outside it or critically describe the modern/colonial matrix of knowledge. Yet border thinking as a specific form of epistemic response from the exteriority (Dussel, 1985) nevertheless emerges from the lacunas of modernity and escapes its control. Its initial impulse is often a discrepancy between having to live in the colonial matrix and never really belonging to its memories, feelings and ways of sensing. We have felt the growing gap between our affective experiences or, in decolonial terms, the body-politics of knowledge and perception, and the established mainstream feminist theories. This prompted our initial negotiating border thinking and acting. Our feminist consciousness is grounded in being the border which cuts across one’s own self, not merely crossing borders and observing them from some detached vantage point: as Gloria Anzaldu´ a writes, ‘to survive the borderlands one must live sin fronteras, be a crossroads’ (Anzaldu´ a, 1999: 217). This position builds an inter-subjective model that potentially leads to coalitions between interrelated gendered others.

Feminist border thinking is a horizontal transversal networking of different local histories and sensibilities mobilised through a number of common, yet pluriversal and open categories. The positive impulse behind border thinking replaces the negative stance that entraps women in multiple oppressions with the re-existent position of building an alternative world in which no one will be an other. Personally, each of us has her own struggles, though we share certain nodal points crucial for our pluriversal border thinking. For example, Madina has been from the start at the border of the Western, postsocialist and postcolonial feminisms each of which remained blind to one or more sides of her specific post-Soviet and postcolonial experiences and ‘infinite layers’ of identification (Minh-ha, 1986: 93–94), intersecting race, ethnicity, religion, class, language and sexuality. Moreover, border thinking and acting in Madina’s case was initially far from any coming back to the roots or any indigenous cosmologies. In other words, it was not a dichotomy of Ariel and Caliban. She opted instead for a trickster as an essentially border persona, a cunning player who deceived power by having learnt – like Caliban – to speak its language. Yet in contrast to Caliban, feminist tricksters master the colonising tongue not to curse and condemn, but rather to overcome the suffocating system existentially, intellectually and affectively. Ironically, destabilising from within opens additional opportunities and life models both for docile assimilating Ariels and for indignant, often essentialist Calibans. Madina has acted as such a negotiating and metamorphising trickster on several levels – from teaching and academic writing to her feminist decolonial fiction subverting the Russian language and high literary canon, and questioning rigid ethnic nationalist attachments and local colour patriotism.

Many phenomena situated between feminist art, academic discourses and social and political activism cannot be properly understood without border thinking grounded in pluritopic hermeneutics (Panikkar, 1975) because otherwise they become distorted or simplified. We cannot assume that the other has the same self-understanding as we do, that they belong to our ‘horizon’ of pre-existing values and categories, that we start the interpretation process before any hermeneutical circle has been formed. This does not mean that the other is completely opaque and impossible to understand without violating their right to be different. But such an understanding has to be performed through a dialogic and experiential learning which in the end strives to eliminate otherness as a category invented by the same and grounded in exclusion.

One phenomenon grounded in border thinking is the Yerevan Queering Collective (YQC) from the post-Soviet republic of Armenia (Queering Yerevan, 2014). YQC slips between the usual taxonomies and can hardly be called a social or political movement in a traditional sense or an art movement as it resides precisely in between all of these concepts. Collective members’ concept and practice of ‘slant activism’ is a good example of border activism-cum-art. By queering they do not just mean raising awareness about LGBT issues. As active member Shushan Avagyan puts it,

the task of the collective has been to disturb habitual perception or to defamiliarize, in a purely Shklovskian sense, by rendering the familiar in unfamiliar terms in order to slow down automated perception [. . .] This slant activism differs from conventional acts of intervention that use direct or straightforward language to get across a certain message, or elicit a specific response. (2013)3

Taking into account the extreme heteropatriarchal nationalism of the Armenian state and its corrupt ideologies of belonging that silently allow the emergence and thriving of various anti-LGBT reactionary groups, YQC refuses both to be coopted into the state political system (as they find such co-optations ineffective and always leading to harmful compromises) and to come into a direct confrontation with the state (which would simply mean incarceration and other forms of prosecution). Instead YQC chooses a border trickster positioning of outsmarting power and overcoming censorship through the multiplicity of indirect (slant) interpretations and multi-semantic actions. YQC is grounded in horizontality, anonymity and volatility. Balancing individuality and collective invisibility, the group reproduces the basic principles of anarchist feminist movements and/or indigenous radical feminism (for example, the Zapatistas). Importantly, they are political activists who see art as one of the most powerful ways of decolonising our minds, bodies and sensibilities, increasing civic engagement, challenging the status quo and radicalising others into action, following the ground-breaking path identified by Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldu´ a in This Bridge Called My Back (1983) over three decades ago.

Political art is particularly in high demand when all other existing concepts become ineffective for our efforts to define what is happening. Media Impact, another art activist initiative from Moscow, stated in their recent manifesto that ‘beyond the exhausted forms of political resistance and beyond fashion and consumerism, including the consumption of others, that we reject, in the midst of resistance, in the space liberated through collectivization, there emerge new grounds for the communal life’ (2015). Similarly, YQC performs rigorous feminist critique in an indirect artistic language impossible to taxonomise within the existing forms of political activism. Their activities include guerrilla art performances, the planting of trees in various politically significant spaces, graffiti of feminist poetry in social housing environments, stencil art in different public spaces and unsanctioned museum interventions that confront the official state supported art exhibitions. In short, this means transforming urban spaces on a micro-level, reclaiming them as decolonised and disidentifying with the ugly state distortions. The YQC is a border phenomenon both in its media and in its political and social positioning which is critical of the Armenian neo-traditionalist state as well as the Western neocolonialist habits of objectification, salvation and assimilation, stripping people of their agency. Arguably, YQC’s defamiliarisation and queering exemplify not only border thinking but also disidentification, a praxis to which we now turn.
