> 来源：Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.)\Border thinking and disidentification Postcolonial and postsocialist feminist dialogues (Tlostanova, M. Koobak etc.).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Feminist disidentifications

Another theoretical tool that could facilitate critical yet non-polarising dialogues is disidentification. This has been used to further understanding of gendered and sexualised identity formation (Butler, 1993; Mun˜ oz, 1999; Medina, 2003) but also to grasp intersections of gender and generation and to critically conceptualise political tensions among different feminist ‘waves’ (Henry, 2004; Dean, 2008; Tuin, 2011; Scharff, 2011). Moreover, this concept has also been related to intersectional processes of de/colonisation (Fuss, 1995), to Marxist critiques of ideologies (Peˆ cheux, 1983) and has recently been explored as an intersectional writing strategy (Lykke, 2014).

Performance studies scholar Jose´ Esteban Mun˜ oz sees ‘disidentification’ as a ‘third mode of dealing with dominant ideology, one that neither opts to assimilate within such a structure nor strictly opposes it; rather, disidentification is a strategy that works on and against dominant ideology’ (1999: 11, emphasis ours) but in a way that does not erase differences. As a so-called third option between identification (as assimilation under the pressures of dominant ideology) and counteridentification (such as utopianism which, through its oppositionality in its attempt to break free, validates and reinforces the dominant ideology), disidentifying emerges as a workable strategy for a postsocialist as well as postcolonial feminist positioning within transnational feminist discourses.

As non-Western and not-quite-Western gendered others, we are in many ways working ‘on and against’ the majority discourses in order to transform ‘the cultural logic from within’ (Mun˜ oz, 1999: 11–12), decoding cultural fields from the perspective of our marginalised subject positions. Such delinking takes place on various levels in our disidentifying praxis, from academic activities such as writing articles or designing critical courses, to the public sphere of collaborations with social movements and art activism. In her work on Anna-Stina Treumund (Koobak, 2013), Estonia’s first artist to put lesbian sexuality centre-stage, Redi addresses problems with time and space within transnational feminist discourses. In particular, she pays critical attention to the artist’s photographic self-portraiture so as to not reinforce the normative story of Eastern Europe’s time lag in relation to Western progress narrative. Having left firmly behind in the 1980s a sexual politics premised on a desire for visibility and recognition, Western feminist theory seemed unable to provide a framework for this visual artist who would not place her work within the more generalised discourse of Eastern European belatedness. Reading Tremund’s art through Mun˜ oz’s idea of working on and against Western influences to produce a disidentification with western hegemonic timeframes offers a viable alternative. For example, Treumund’s self-portrait Drag $\left( 2 0 1 0 \right) ^ { 4 }$ depicts a woman performing a man performing a woman and shows the act of photographing as a moment of subject formation. This piece can be read through intertextual connections to other artworks in Western as well as Eastern European contexts. By citing Nan Goldin’s Misty and Jimmy Paulette in a Taxi (1991) and Vladislav Mamyshev-Monroe’s Monroe (1996), this piece reappropriates citational practices to comment on the here and now of the photographic act and to resist discourses of the backwardness of Eastern Europe. These citations are all temporally charged and thus offer ways to reconfigure normative timelines prevalent in transnational feminist discourses. Treumund is not simply following the path of a ‘good subject’ towards a clear and linear identification with the Western discursive feminist and queer discourse. Neither is she a ‘bad subject’ who entirely resists and rejects the images and identificatory sites that are available through the hegemonic Western discourse that dominates current global understandings of feminist and queer politics and artistic practices. Instead, through applying a mixture of intertextual references, she disidentifies with dominant Western discourses of feminist and queer activism, neither willing to assimilate under the pressures of dominant ideology nor trying to break free of its inescapable sphere.

Furthermore, we suggest that just as a person’s identity cannot be reduced to a single identification, that very same identity cannot be reduced to a single disidentification. Instead, it is multilayered and inflected with power dynamics at each level.

To provide an example of the different layers of disidentifications, we will analyse the dialectics of different representations of a particular case of sexual violence. Following the gang rape and brutal assault of Jyoti Singh Pandey, a 23-year-old medical student, on 12 December 2012 in New Delhi, India, unprecedented public protests ensued with urban youth taking to the streets. There were clashes with the police, and finally the government imposed curfew orders in parts of the city. After Jyoti succumbed to her internal injuries the government set up an independent commission, led by former Chief Justice of Supreme Court, the late J. S. Verma, to recommend amendments to the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal Law.

In the events that unfolded we can understand disidentifications at three levels. First, the nature of the protests raises questions. The dynamics of class, caste and religion are integral to the forms and methods of sexual violence against women. However, the participation of urban upper caste women in feminist protests is contentious as they ‘seldom extended their solidarity to marginalized groups who, [. . .] in the context of the untouchables, ‘‘have no press’’‘ (Dutta and Sircar, 2013: 295). Why have there not been similar protests in relation to caste based sexual violence? (Kannabiran, 2014: 2). Exceptionalising the Delhi gang rape case runs the risk of eliding the equally brutal experiences of women from marginalised communities. Are some rapes more worthy of feminist concern, national outrage, sustained media coverage and collective mourning? Are some women constructed as the ‘perfect rape victim’ to generate national sympathy (Sen, 2013: 1)? As Kannabiran states, ‘while all murders result in loss of life [. . .] targeted murder against members belonging to a social group that is vulnerable [. . .] reflects a systemic pattern that systematically re-inforces power and subjugates entire communities through violence’ (2014: 2). What we see here is the disidentification of urban upper caste women with Dalit politics, a disidentification buttressed through the official discourse that does not recognise caste-based sexual assaults as violence.

Second, the situation was compounded by a litany of insensitive and to some extent misogynist statements made by religious leaders and legal advocates following the rape (Ghosh, 2013). For example, defence lawyer of perpetrator Manohar Lal Sharma stated ‘until today, I have not seen a single incident or example of rape with a respected lady’ (Bennett-Smith, 2013). This in many ways corroborated the attitudes held by the accused as well. In the documentary India’s Daughter (2015), director Leslee Udwin interviewed another accused, Mukesh Singh, who said: ‘When being raped, she shouldn’t fight back. She should just be silent and allow the rape. Then they’d have dropped her off after ‘‘doing her’’ and only hit the boy’. Here, disidentification works differently. In disidentifying with the rape victim and her mannerisms, the lawyer, religious leaders and the accused inadvertently hail ‘rape’ as a tool for correcting an inherent immorality of the victim.

Third, the reaction in national and international mass media reports also brings up various levels of disidentification. Whilst the ‘victim’ was projected in international mass media reports as a new modern and empowered ‘third world woman’, the assailants were cast in a familiar colonial refrain – as backward, traditional and barbaric (Joseph, 2013; Kristof, 2013; Purves, 2013). This was corroborated in a statement made by the Home Minister, P. Chidambaram, who sought to blame migrants to Delhi for crimes like rape: ‘And these migrants who settle in city’s north-west colonies carry a kind of behaviour which is unacceptable in any modern city. So crimes [such as rape] do take place’ (Economic Times, 2010). Prime Minister Manmohan Singh also told Indian Police Service probationers: ‘We have a large number of footloose young men who come to urban areas from rural areas in search of jobs, in search of livelihood strategies and if they do not get well absorbed in the process of development in rural areas, they can become a menace in society’ (Hindustan Times, 2012). Thus, while Jyoti was projected as ‘liberal and upwardly mobile’, the accused were ‘misogynist, working class and rural’ (Roychowdhury, 2013: 284). Such reductionist understandings of modern vs traditional, rural vs urban reduce the complexities of gendered violence in everyday life and obliterate the workings of neoliberal capitalist and patriarchal frameworks within a global economy that India has embraced since liberalisation. While disidentifying with the economies of rural working class populations, they inadvertently create further stereotypes of rural/urban and west/the rest, reflecting reversed orientalism.

It is also not surprising that such statements emerging from within the nation would be misinterpreted or used selectively within a global economy of knowledge that implicates Delhi as the world’s ‘rape capital’. For example, a German university professor’s rejection email to an Indian student’s application for internship, citing the ‘rape problem in India’ as reason, sparked an online furore. The letter she wrote in response to the application read as follows: ‘Dear Sir, Unfortunately I don’t accept any Indian male students for internships. We hear a lot about the rape problem in India which I cannot support. I have many female students in my group, so I think this attitude is something I cannot support’. Subsequently, after an intervention by the German ambassador to India, Michael Steiner, Leipzig University biochemistry professor Dr Annette G. Beck-Sickinger posted an apology on the German embassy’s website (Campbell, 2015). This relates to Mun˜ oz’s (2000) argument about the conventions of majoritarian public sphere and the ‘official’ national affect it sponsors (associated with white middle-class subjectivity) by foregrounding the moralism of affective normativity. This is juxtaposed with the minoritarian ‘affect’ which, in our example, is the sexually excessive Indian identity.

In another instance the Harvard College’s Women’s Centre, headed by Diane Rosenfeld and Jacqueline Bhabha, convened a Policy Task Force, ‘Beyond Gender Equality’, to offer recommendations to India and other South Asian countries in the wake of the New Delhi gang rape and murder. The aim was to produce a ‘working paper that advises on the implementation of the recommendations from the Verma Committee’ (Menon, 2013). How would such a border crossing be useful without any collaboration or conversation with the many scholars and activists working on sexual violence in India? This action both ignores the longstanding women’s activism in India and reduces the ‘problem’ of sexual violence to a national epidemic rather than an issue that affects women globally (see also Vance, 2013). Rashmee Roshan Lall’s provocative piece suggests that ‘India has a woman problem’ (2012). In these kinds of actions, cultures are presented as neat and prediscursively individuated from each other, while the insistence on ‘difference’ that accompanies the ‘production’ of distinct ‘cultures’ appears unproblematic. Culture then becomes a pejorative term and it is used as a signifier for a set of hierarchical distinctions (Volpp, 2001: 1194–1197). For a fruitful North-South dialogue, a culturally grounded feminism, one that critically evaluates nationalsocietal responses towards violence, is needed.

Disidentification as a transformative tool must incorporate plural speaking positions, each articulating similar concerns (such as violence) but accounting for the specific embeddedness of the realities of these positions and recognising implicit contradictions. On the national front, we disidentify with some governmental responses, though not disengaging with the recent government which seems to have re-awakened on the question of gender rights in India. Arguably, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance (2013) of the union government overlooked the recommendations of the Justice Verma Commission (Teltumbde, 2013). As Mohanty suggests, the ordinance was a ‘containment and subversion of people’s struggles against the culture and practices of sexual violence’ (in Alcoff, 2013). Yet the 2013 amendment broadened the definition of rape to extend beyond penilevaginal penetration, which is a positive sign. Reducing rape to a problem of ‘uneducated’, ‘rural and footloose men’ ignores how the ‘growing culture of rape is a social externality of economic reforms [. . .] where everything has a price and nothing has value’ (Shiva, 2013). Labels such as ‘rape capital’ position men as the cause of gender-unequal practices in India. This is not true. In fact, one of the significant features of the Delhi protest was the participation of young men for women’s rights – a recognition that women’s issues were gender issues affecting both men and women.

Experiences of disidentification get compounded when engaging with international discourses. The misinterpretations and appropriations of these discourses allow us to see how coloniality of knowledge is manifested in different forms in contemporary society. We disidentify with western feminists who occupy a moral high ground (evident in the Harvard research group). There is a need for new transversal dialogues that are not only able to locate similarities but also see contextual and historical differences of colonialism and imperialism, and understand gender and sexual relations alongside white heteronormativity. Finally, it is important to point out that ‘disidentifications are dependent upon previous identifications, however faulty and stereotypical’ (Ratcliffe, 2005: 62). While Mun˜ oz rightly suggests the liberatory potential of disidentification from the perspective of the marginalised, we also need to understand the everyday articulations of power by the dominant through the very same processes of disidentification.
