> 来源：Domesticating the World African Consumerism and the Genealogies of Globalization (Jeremy Prestholdt)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Domesticating the World African Consumerism and the Genealogies of Globalization (Jeremy Prestholdt)\Domesticating the World African Consumerism and the Genealogies of Globalization (Jeremy Prestholdt).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 18. Ibid., 29.

19. Eilts, “Ahmad bin Na\`aman’s Mission,” 252; Jiddawi, “Arab Account Book,” 29; Letter from William H. Feely, 14 March 1845, MH-14, Richard P. Waters Papers, PE.

20. For recent definitions of consumerism in varying contexts see C. Carson, “The Consumer Revolution in Colonial British America: Why Demand?” in Of Consuming Interests: The Style of Life in the Eighteenth Century, ed. Cary Carson, Ronald Hoffman, and Peter J. Albert (Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1994), 486, fn. 5; Peter Stearns, Consumerism in World History: The Global Transformation of Desire (New York: Routledge, 2001), ix.

21. Rigby to Wood, 1 May 1860, L/P&S/9/37, India Office Library, British Library (hereafter IOL).

22. Jean and John Comaroff, Of Revelation and Revolution, 2:89.

23. This kind of transatlantic travel was common in the early to midnineteenth century. For example, American merchant ships often employed Zanzibaris and Comorians for multiple journeys. See, for example, the contracts of “Malbruke, Hammadee, & Oulede,” to work on the bark Arthur Pickering in Consular Certificate, Mansfield, 14 December 1858, MH 23, West Papers, PE.

24. Possibly Michael Shepard, a Salem businessman whose firm had agents at Zanzibar, or a member of his family.

25. J. Ross Browne, Etchings of a Whaling Cruise (1846; repr., Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1968), 412–13, 345.

26. M. Guillain, Documents sur l’histoire, la géographie et le commerce de l’Afrique Orientale, illustrated volume (Paris: Bertrand, 1856). By 1891, the sultan was handing out autographed photographs to visitors. See M. French-Sheldon, Sultan to Sultan: Adventures among the Masai and other Tribes of East Africa (London: Saxon, 1892).

27. Clelia Weeks, “Zanzibar,” Harper’s New Monthly Magazine 38 (December–May, 1868–1869), 313.

28. Rebecca Wakefield, Memoirs of Mrs. Rebecca Wakefield, Wife of the Rev. T. Wakefield, ed. R. Brewin (London: Hamilton, Adams, 1879), 112–13.

29. Bhabha, quoted in a question addressed to James Clifford, in Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson, and Paula A. Treichler, eds., Cultural Studies (New York: Routledge, 1992), 114.

30. Joseph Osgood, Notes of Travel (Salem, MA: George Creamer, 1854), 29–30; Judy Aldrick, “The Painted Plates of Zanzibar,” Kenya Past and Present 12 (1997): 26–28.

31. Wakefield, Memoirs, 93–94, 108; Weeks, “Zanzibar,” 307.

32. Emily Ruete [Sayyida Salme], Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, reprinted in An Arabian Princess Between Two Worlds: Memoirs, Letters Home, Sequels to the Memoirs, Syrian Customs and Usages, ed. E. Van Donzel (New York: E. J. Brill, 1993), 164–65.

33. Jean Baudrillard, Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings, ed. Mark Poster (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988), 44.

34. The consumer’s “need” for the vase is often directly related to its essential place within a standard assortment of goods. We can think of contemporary American homes in similar terms. A “complete set” for the living room often includes a couch or sofa, easy chair, television, coffee table, entertainment center, bookcase, and pictures on the wall. The absence of any one of these can seem disorienting, and thus each is desired for its importance in completing the culturally defined set; see Baudrillard, Selected Writings, 196.

35. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 164–65.

36. Elizabeth and Henry Jacob, A Quaker Family in India and Zanzibar, 1863–1865, ed. Y. Bird (York, UK: William Sessions, 2000), 165.

37. Edward Steere, “On East African Tribes and Languages,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 1 (1872): cxlvi.

38. Waters Journal, 14 April 1837, MH 14, Richard P. Waters Papers, PE.   
39. Browne, Whaling Cruise, 441.

40. Jacob and Jacob, Quaker Family, 165.

41. On Captain Hassan, see Captain Henry Hart to the Vice Admiral Sir John Gore, 10 February 1834, F/4/1475, Board’s Collections, vol. 1475, IOL; W. Ruschenberger, A Voyage Round the World: Including an Embassy to Muscat and Siam, in 1835, 1836, and 1837 (Philadelphia: Carey, Lea & Blanchard, 1839), 37.

42. Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 28–29.

43. James Clifford, Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997); Ulf Hannerz, “The World in Creolization,” Africa 57, no. 4 (1987): 546–59.

44. See, for instance, the story of Juma Nasibu, one of the porters in Dodgshun’s caravan to Ujiji in 1877–79, who had been in England for three years, where he had spent several months in school. He used this experience to his advantage and found employment with the Cameron expedition and later worked at the British Consulate. See Norman Bennett, ed., From Zanzibar to Ujiji: The Journal of Arthur W. Dodgshun, 1877–1879 (Boston: Boston University Press, 1969), 35, 55, fn. 113. Charles Pickering wrote that he met many “Soahili” in Bombay who came to India as free sailors; see The Races of Man and Their Geographical Distribution (London: George Bell and Sons, 1876), 192. See also Sultan Majid’s protest of the constant English harassment of Zanzibari shipping under the pretense that the African crews must be slaves; Saeed bin Majid to Chuchill, December 1868, L/P&S/9/48, IOL; and “Return of Slaves emancipated by Lieut. Col. Playfair, from the date of his assuming charge of British Consulate Zanzibar [n.d.],” A12/3, ZNA.

45. Ship’s Register, British Consulate: Free African Register, AA12/13, ZNA; Janet Ewald, “Crossers of the Sea: Slaves, Freedmen, and Other Migrants in the

Northwestern Indian Ocean, c. 1750–1914,” American Historical Review 105, no. 1 (2000): 69–91.

46. Kirk to Secretary of the India Office, 23 April 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL. 47. Ludwig Ritter von Höhnel, Discovery of Lakes Rudolf and Stefanie, vol. 1 (London: Longmans, Green, 1894), 11–12.

48. Browne, Whaling Cruise, 350.

49. For Wainwright’s journal, see Jacob Wainwright, “Tagebuch von Jacob Wainwright über den Transport von Dr. Livingston’s Leiche, 4 Mai 1873–18, Februar 1874,” Petermann’s Mittheilungen 20 (1874): 187–93.

50. Joseph Thomson, To the Central African Lakes and Back: The Narrative of the Royal Geographical Society’s East Central African Expedition, 1878–80 (London: S. Low, Marsten, Searle & Rivington, 1881), 34. Hugh Peter Kayamba, son of Sultan Kimweri of Wakilindi, likewise studied in England before returning to Zanzibar to teach at St. Andrew’s College (Universities Mission to Central Africa). Kayamba was a Muslim, but converted to Christianity and studied at UMCA schools before traveling to England. See M. Kayamba, “The Story of Martin Kayamba Mdumi, M. B. E. of the Bondei Tribe,” in Ten Africans, ed. Marjory Perham (London: Faber and Faber, 1936), 173–99.

51. Muhammad bin Khamis accompanied the sultan’s envoy to England in 1842 and had been previously “taken to England to be educated” by one “Mr. Hunt”; Hamerton to Secret Committee, 9 February 1842, L/P&S/9/12, IOL. The renowned geographer William Cooley depended on Muhammad bin Khamis’s information for his Inner Africa Laid Open, in an Attempt to Trace the Chief Lines of Communication Across That Continent South of the Equator (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1852). Browne, Whaling Cruise, 344– 45; cf. J. Osgood, Notes of Travel, 45; Richard Burton, Zanzibar: City, Island, and Coast (London: Tinsley Brothers, 1872), 1:286.

52. Burton later wrote of Muhammad’s proposal and dismissed it as if the very prospect of an African leading an exploration party were richly ironic (Zanzibar 2:287).

53. W. Ruschenberger, Voyage Round the World, 37.

54. Even new spirits, or pepo, came into existence. Grant wrote that the Zanzibari freed slaves in his employ described a great variety of pepo, including several of English and Ethiopian provenance. See James Grant, A Walk Across Africa, or Domestic Scenes from My Nile Journey (Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons, 1864), 259. Alpers has analyzed a mid-nineteenth century pepo of which a detailed description exists. Gongoni binti Gongoni was a female pepo whose genealogy linked her to Pemba, Tumbatu (on Zanzibar Island), and southern Arabia. See Edward Alpers, “ ‘Ordinary Household Chores’: Ritual and Power in a Nineteenth-Century Swahili Women’s Spirit Possession Cult,” International Journal of African Historical Studies 17, no. 4 (1984): 695.

55. See Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and Sexuality in the Colonial Conquest (New York: Routledge, 1995); and T. Richards, The Commodity Culture of Victorian England: Advertising and Spectacle, 1851– 1914 (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1990).

56. James Clifford, “Traveling Cultures,” in Grossberg, Nelson, and Treichler, eds., Cultural Studies, 114–15.

57. Swahili was the language of communication in most environments throughout the nineteenth century—with some exceptions, such as among Indian businessmen, in state correspondence, or in some religious matters.

58. Grant McCracken fleshes out this distinction between systems of fashion and patina in Culture and Consumption (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988), 16.

59. Glassman argues that the ever-wider distribution of what were previously “prestige” goods gave relatively poor people an opportunity to, “contest the precise meanings of what had once been exclusive markers of status and political power.” See Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot: Revelry, Rebellion, and Popular Consciousness on the Swahili Coast, 1856–1888 (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1995), 37.

60. Ruete [Salme], Memoirs of an Arabian Princess. His sons would follow this tradition. See Kirk to Gonne, 13 April 1869, and Letter from Suliman bin Ali Secretary to His Highness Seyd Majid Sultan of Zanzibar to Churchill, April 1869, L/P&S/9/48, IOL.

61. Laura Fair gives a particularly rich account of changes in fashion among non-elites in Pastimes and Politics in Zanzibar: Culture, Community and Identity in Post-Abolition Urban Zanzibar. (Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001), and “Remaking Fashion in the Paris of the Indian Ocean: Dress, Performance, and the Cultural Construction of a Cosmopolitan Zanzibari Identity,” in Fashioning Africa: Power and the Politics of Dress, ed. Jean Allman (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004), 13–30.

62. See A. Coombes and A. Brah, “Introduction: The Conundrum of ‘Mixing’”; and Nicholas Thomas, “Technologies of Conversion: Cloth and Christianity in Polynesia,” in Hybridity and Its Discontents: Politics, Science, Culture, ed. A. Coombes and A. Brah (New York: Routledge, 2000), 1–16 and 198–215. Jean and John Comaroff argue that Western clothes offered an “experimental language” for the creation of new identities (Of Revelation and Revolution, 2:235).

63. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 259.

64. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984). Bourdieu challenges the Veblenian notion of consumer demand as engaging in competition with one’s neighbors in an attempt to either keep up with or outdo them. Since there are elements of competitiveness in much inter- as well as intragroup consumer demand, we might think of demand as addressing inclusion, differentiation, and uniqueness alternately.

65. For the role of actual and metaphorical clothing in the discourses of slave-making and unmaking, see Jonathon Glassman, “The Bondsman’s New Clothes: The Contradictory Consciousness of Slave Resistance on the Swahili Coast,” Journal of African History 32, no. 2 (1991): 277–312; and Fair, Pastimes and Politics. On the idea of consumption as constituting of “social citizenship,” see Don Slater, Consumer Culture and Modernity (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1997), 4–5.

66. Ruete, Memoirs of an Arabian Princess, 157.

67. On the Mrima, many Shirazi sought to affect an “Arab” identity in the

latter nineteenth century in order to, as Glassman suggests, not only equate themselves with Omanis from overseas but also distinguish themselves from newcomers (Glassman, Feasts and Riot, 63).

68. Playfair, “Administration Report of the Zanzibar Political Agency, for the Year Ending 31 May, 1864,” L/P&S/9/41, IOL. Of these, 62.5 percent were French imports, 31 percent were British re-exports from Bombay, and 6.5 percent were German (from Hamburg).

69. Baudrillard suggests that the advent of mirrors as central features of home decor in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe reflects an expansion of consumers’ consciousnesses, a new obsession with self-replication. See Jean Baudrillard, The System of Objects (New York: Verso, 1996), 22–23.

70. Burton, Lake Regions 2:400; Hines to Secretary of State, 25 October 1864, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ; Sykes, “Notes on the Possessions of the Imaum of Muskat, on the Climate and Productions of Zanzibar, and on the Prospects of African Discovery from Mombas,” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society 23 (1853): 107–8.

71. Edward Ropes, The Zanzibar Letters of Edward D. Ropes, Jr., 1882– 1892, ed. Norman Bennett (Boston: Boston University Press, 1973), 18.

72. H. Cotterill, ed., Travels and Researches among the Lakes and Mountains of Eastern and Central Africa: From the Journals of the Late J. Frederic Elton (London: John Murray, 1879), 66.

73. Barghash sat for several photographic portraits and, according to Harry Johnston, he sent one of these to Paris with instructions for it to be enlarged, doubled, and converted from an image of him in sitting position to him standing. H. Johnston, The Kilima-njaro Expedition: A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 1886), 31–32.

74. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 22–23.

75. Capt. Atkins Hamerton, quoted in John M. Gray, History of Zanzibar, from the Middle Ages to 1856 (London: Oxford University Press, 1962), 205; C. Devereux, A Cruise on the “Gorgon”; or, Eighteen Months on H. M. S. “Gorgon,” Engaged in the Suppression of the Slave Trade on the East Coast of Africa (London: Bell and Daldy, 1869), 296–97.

76. On the changing relation of the Barghash state to its subjects, see Randall Pouwels, “Islam and Islamic Leadership in the Coastal Communities of Eastern Africa, 1700 to 1914” (PhD diss., University of California, Los Angeles, 1979), part 3.

77. Barghash imported a printing press and began publishing Ibadhi jurisprudence volumes in 1880. Valerie J. Hoffman, “Muslim-Christian Encounters in Nineteenth-Century Zanzibar,” MIT Electronic Journal of Middle Eastern Studies. Special Issue: Islam and Arabs in East Africa (Fall 2005, http://web.mit.edu/ cis/www/mitejmes/intro.htm, accessed July 19, 2007), 63; Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 33–34.

78. Kirk to Wedderburn, 1 January 1872, L/P&S/9/49, IOL.

79. Henry M. Stanley, Through the Dark Continent, vol. 1 (New York: Harper Brothers, 1878), 43.

80. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 29.

81. Henry M. Stanley, In Darkest Africa (London: Sampson Low, 1890), 60.

82. Speer, Report on Zanzibar, 1862, roll 2, vols. 4–5, USCZ.

83. Playfair justified Barghash’s banishment by arguing that he was “most intolerant of anything like civilizing influences and in his communications with Europeans he was habitually haughty even as to insolence.” Playfair to Gonne, 19 April 1865,L/P&S/9/42, IOL.

84. Abdul Sheriff and Javed Jafferji, Zanzibar Town: An Architectural Exploration (Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1998), 76.

85. “On the Track of the Germans in East Africa,” Pall Mall Gazette, 6182, vol. 41, 3 June 1885.

86. Beehler, The Cruise of the Brooklyn (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1885), 174.

87. According to oral tradition, the doors were carved by Indian artisans brought to Zanzibar specifically for this purpose; interview with Muhammad Rashid, Beit al Ajaib, August 2000; Abdul Sheriff, ed., The History and Conservation of Zanzibar Stone Town (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1995), 52.

88. Battle has suggested that Barghash’s House of Wonders was, “an expression of domination, the city is the arena of display.” See S. Battle, “The Old Dispensary: An Apogee of Zanzibari Architecture,” in Sheriff, ed., Zanzibar Stone Town, 94–96.

89. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 31–32; John Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game: The Narrative of a Sporting Trip from Zanzibar to the Borders of the Masai (London: Longmans, Green, 1889), 15–16.

90. On the sultan’s visit to the Crystal Palace, see the Times (London), 18 June 1875, as well as thirty other articles in the same paper covering his entire stay in England. See also the New York Times, multiple articles from 10 June to 9 August 1875; L. Sabunji, Tanzih al-absar wa-al-afkar fi rihlat Sultan Zanjabar, jama‘ahu Zahir ibn Sa‘id (Muscat: Wizarat al-Turath al-Qawmi wa-al-Thaqafah, 1988); Kirk to Earl of Derby, 17 May 1875, L/P&S/9/51, IOL.

91. “Queen’s Jubilee—Mr. T. Tohan [sic] of Zanzibar, Gift of an Hospital and £15,000 to Celebrate in Zanzibar,” Times (London), 2 March 1887, 11, col. F.

92. Battle, “Old Dispensary,” 95.

93. Ibid., 91.

94. Ibid., 96.

95. See especially F. Siravo, Zanzibar: A Plan for the Historic Stone Town (Zanzibar: Gallery Publications, 1996).

96. Frere to Granville, 14 January 1873, AA1/10, ZNA.

97. Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 30.

98. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 28.

99. “The Sultan of Zanzibar,” New York Times (reprinted from the Standard), 17 July 1875, 2.

100. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15; P. Le Charmetant, D’Alger à Zanzibar (Paris: Libr. Tardieu, 1882), 131–37.

101. See Robert Lyne, An Apostle of Empire, being the Life of Sir Lloyd William Matthews (London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1936), 46; Reginald Coupland, The Exploitation of East Africa, 1856–1890 (London: Faber and Faber, 1939), 241–42; Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15, fn. 51.

102. Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 15.

103. Willoughby, East Africa and Its Big Game, 16; Johnston, Kilima-njaro Expedition, 31, 35; Ropes, Zanzibar Letters, 10, 13, 31.

104. Thomson, Central African Lakes, 26.

105. Beehler, Cruise of the Brooklyn, 178–79.

106. Burton wrote of coastal elites “priding themselves” on the public use of umbrellas (Lake Regions 1:34). See Glassman’s discussion of the use of umbrellas at Saadani in Feasts and Riot, 157.

107. Burton, Zanzibar 1:109; Burton, Lake Regions 1:386–87.

108. “Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation of the Presidency of Bombay for the Year 1881–82,” V/17/311, IOL.

109. This notion of a cultural code that is “more than the sum of its parts” is borrowed from Jean and John Comaroff’s reflections in Of Revelation and Revolution 2:245.

110. “Introduction,” and Dipesh Chakrabarty, “Witness to Suffering: Domestic Cruelty and the Birth of the Modern Subject in Bengal,” in Mitchell, Questions of Modernity, xv and 49–86.

111. Robert Young has argued that the resurrection of another Victorian idea—hybridity—as a means of postcolonial critique has severe limitations because it necessarily conjoins divisive bio-categories to contemporary theory. Young writes, “[Hybridity] may be used in different ways, given different inflections and apparently discrete references, but it always reiterates and reinforces the dynamics of the same conflictual economy whose tensions and divisions it reenacts in its own antithetical structure.” See Robert Young, Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race (New York: Routledge, 1995), 27.

112. Michael Geyer and Charles Bright argue that contests over the terms of global integration and how the identities of individuals, social groups, and societies should be defined was a hallmark of the twentieth-century world. See their “World History in a Global Age,” American Historical Review, 100, no. 4 (1995): 1058.

113. As Jonathon Glassman demonstrates, imported concepts such as race and nation—much like the objects described above—were domesticated to speak to specific, twentieth-century Zanzibari concerns; see “Slower Than a Massacre: The Multiple Sources of Racial Thought in Colonial Africa,” American Historical Review, 109, no. 3 (2004): 720–54.
