> 来源：Design for the Real World Human Ecology and Social Change (Victor Papanek)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design for the Real World Human Ecology and Social Change (Victor Papanek)\Design for the Real World Human Ecology and Social Change (Victor Papanek).md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Phylogenocide: A History of the Industrial Design Profession

We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars.

OSCAR WILDE

The ultimate job of design is to transform man's environment and tools and, by extension, man himself. Man has always changed himself and his surroundings, but recently science, technology, and mass production have advanced so radically that changes are more rapid, more thorough, and often less predictable. We are beginning to be able to define and isolate problems, to determine possible goals and work meaningfully toward them. And an over-technologized, sterile, and inhuman environment has become one possible future; a world choking under a permanent, dun-colored pollution umbrella, another. In addition the various sciences and technologies have become woefully compartmentalized and specialized. Often, more complex problems can be attacked only by teams of specialists, speaking only their own professional jargon. Industrial designers, who are frequently members of such a team, find that, besides fulfilling their normal design function, they must act as a communication bridge between other team

members. Many times the designer may be the only one able to speak the various technical jargons; because of his educational background, the role of team interpreter is forced upon him. So we find the industrial designer becoming the team synthesist, a position to which he has been elevated by the default of people from the other disciplines.

This has not always been true.

Many books on industrial design suggest that design began when man began making tools. While the difference between Australopithecus africanus and the modern designer may not be as great as one might think or hope, the idea of equating man the toolmaker with the start of the profession is just an attempt to gain status for the profession by evoking a specious historical precedent. "In the beginning was Design," obviously, but not industrial design. Henry Dreyfuss, one of the founders of the profession, says in Designing for People (probably the best and most characteristic book about industrial design):

The Industrial Designer began by eliminating excess decoration, his real job began when he insisted on dissecting the product, seeing what made it tick, and devising means of making it tick better-—then making it look better. He never forgets that beauty is only skin-deep. For years in our office we have kept before us the concept that what we are working on is going to be ridden in, sat upon, looked at, talked into, activated, operated, or in some way used by people individually or en masse. If the point of contact betueen the product and the people becomes a point of friction, then the Industrial Designer has failed. If, on the other hand, people are made safer, more comfortable, more eager to purchase, more efficient— or just plain happier—the designer has succeeded. He brings to this task a detached, analytical point of view. He consults closely with the manufacturer, the manufacturer's engineers, production men, and sales staff, keeping in mind whatever peculiar problems the firm may have in the business or industrial world. He will compromise up to a point but he refuses to budge on design principles he knows to be sound. Occasionally he may lose a client, but he rarely loses the client's respect.

Concern with the design of tools and machinery coincided almost exactly with the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution and, appropriately enough, made its first appearance in England. The first industrial design society was formed in Sweden in 1849, to be followed shortly by similar associations in Austria, Germany, Denmark, England, Norway, and Finland (in that order). The designers of the period were concerned with form-giving, an erratic search for "appropriate beauty" in machine tools and machine-made objects. Looking at the machine, they saw a new thing, a thing that seemed to cry out for decorative embellishments. These decorations were usually garnered from classical ornaments and from major raids into the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Thus, giant hydraulic presses dripped with acanthus leaves, pineapples, stylized wheat sheaves. Many of the "sane design" or "design reform" movements of the time, such as those engendered by the writings and teachings of William Morris in England and Elbert Hubbard in the United States, were rooted in a sort of Luddite antimachine philosophy. By contrast Frank Lloyd Wright said as early as 1894 that "the machine is here to stay" and that the designer should "use this normal tool of civilization to best advantage instead of prostituting it as he has hitherto done in reproducing with murderous ubiquity forms born of other times and other conditions which it can only serve to destroy." Yet designers of the last century were either perpetrators of voluptuous Victorian-Baroque or members of an artsy-craftsy clique who were dismayed by machine technology. The work of the Kunstgewerbeschule in Austria and the German Werkbund anticipated things to come, but it was not until Walter Gropius founded the German Bauhaus in 1919 that an uneasy marriage between art and machine was achieved.

No design school in history had greater influence in shaping taste and design than the Bauhaus. It was the first school to consider design a vital part of the production process rather than "applied art" or "industrial arts." It became the first international forum on design because it drew its faculty and students from all over the world, and its influence traveled as these people later founded design offices and schools in many countries. Almost every major design school in the United States today still uses the basic foundation design course developed by the Bauhaus. It made good sense in 1919 to let a German 19-year-old experiment with drill press and circular saw, welding torch and lathe, so that he might "experience the interaction between tool and material." Today the same method is an anachronism, for an American teenager has spent much of his life in a machine-dominated society (and cumulatively probably a great deal of time lying under various automobiles, souping them up). For a student whose American design school still slavishly imitates teaching patterns developed by the Bauhaus, computer sciences and electronics and plastics technology and cybernetics and bionics simply do not exist. The courses the Bauhaus developed were excellent for their time and place (telesis), but American schools following this pattern in the eighties are perpetuating design infantilism.

The Bauhaus was in a sense a nonadaptive mutation in design, for the genes contributing to its convergence characteristics were badly chosen. In boldface type, it announced its manifesto: "Architects, sculptors, painters, we must all turn to the crafts. . . . Let us create a new guild of craftsmen!" The heavy emphasis on interaction between crafts, art, and design turned out to be a blind alley. The inherent nihilism of the pictorial arts of the post-World War I period had little to contribute that would be useful to the average, or even to the discriminating, consumer. The paintings of Kandinsky, Klee, Feininger, et al., on the other hand, had no connection whatsoever with the anemic elegance that some designers imposed on products.

In the United States, industrial design, like marathon dances, six-day bicycle races, the N.R.A. and the Blue Eagle, and free dishes at the movies, was a child of the Depression. At first glance the swollen belly of a child suffering from malnutrition gives it the appearance of being well fed; only later do you notice the emaciated arms and legs. The products of early American industrial design convey the same sleek obesity and have the same weaknesses.

For the Depression market, the manufacturer needed a new sales gimmick, and the industrial designer reshaped his products for better appearance and lower manufacturing and sales costs. Harold Van Doren's definition of that time in his book Industrial Design was apt:

Industrial Design is the practice of analyzing, creating, and developing products for mass-manufacture. Its goal is to achieve forms which are assured of acceptance before extensive capital investment has been made, and which can be manufactured at a price permitting wide distribution and reasonable profits.

Harold Van Doren, Norman Bel Geddes, Raymond Loewy, Russel Wright, Henry Dreyfuss, Donald Deskey, and Walter Dorwin Teague were the pioneering practitioners of design in America. It is significant that all of them came from the field of stage design and/or window display.

While the architects sold apples on street corners, the exstage-designers and ex-window-dressers were creating "lemons" in lush suites upstairs.

Raymond Loewy's redesign of the Gestetner duplicating machine is probably the first and most famous case of industrial design development. But as Don Wallance was to remark three decades later in Shaping America's Products:

The "before and after" pictures showing mimeographs, locomotives, refrigerators, furniture and numerous other things transformed by industrial design were most impressive. Even more impressive were the differences in before and after sales figures. Oddly enough, when we look at these things now after a passage of more than twenty-five years, it is no longer so clear whether the "before" or the "after" version has best stood the test of time.

This sort of design for the manipulated visual excitement of the moment continued unabated until the beginning of World War II.

The automobile and other consumer industries had to turn their production facilities over to the creation of war supplies, and wartime demands forced a new (though temporary) sense of responsibility on industrial designers. "Ease-o-matic gear shifts" and "auto-magic shell feeding mechanisms" were out of place in a Sherman tank. Design staffs encountered real requirements of performance in the function complex, imposed by combat conditions. The necessity for honest design (design-in-use versus design-in-sales) imposed a healthier discipline than that of the marketplace. Critical material shortages forced those designers who remained in the consumer field to a much keener realization of performance, materials, and other war-imposed limitations. A three-quart casserole, made of plasticized cardboard able to sustain temperatures of 475 degrees for several hours, washable and infinitely reusable, retailing for 45 cents, is an excellent example and seems curiously to have disappeared from the market by 1945.

Shortly after the end of World War II the New York Times carried the first full-page ad for Gimbel's sale of the Reynolds ball-point pen at only \$25 each. By Monday morning, Herald Square was so clogged with people waiting for Gimbel's to open that extra police had to be brought in to control the crowds. Places in the ball-point pen queue could be sold for \$5 to \$10, and, until Gimbel's slapped a one-pen-to-a-customer order on the sale Wednesday, pens could be readily sold for \$50 to \$60 each.

This zany state of affairs lasted for some five weeks: each day Hudson Lodestar monoplanes landed at LaGuardia airport with thousands of pens in their bellies. Even a three-day truckers' strike couldn't affect the sale, as the union promised to "deliver milk, critical food, and Reynolds pens." With a Reynolds pen you could write under water but practically nowhere else. They skipped, they blotted, they leaked in your pockets, and there were no replacement cartridges because the pens were one-shot affairs. You threw them away as soon as they ran dry, if not sooner. Still they sold. For the pen was a do-it-yourself Buck Rogers kit; you bought a pen and you were "post-war." Just as every "ruptured duck" insignia dully gleaming in the lapel of a service man's first civilian suit marked the end of one era, the Reynolds pen leaking in his breast pocket marked the beginning of a new. There were other consumer goods available, but this was the only totally new product on the market.

The science-fictional technology of the year 2000 seemed to have come to roost in 1945. Here was an apparently totally new, post-war product, and each man's miraculously lightweight Reynolds pen gleaming in aluminum was also his personal reassurance that "our side" had won the war. (Now it can be told: our pen was copied from German ball-points, found by Reynolds in a South American bar in 1943.)

Industry pandered to the public's ready acceptance of anything new, anything different. The miscegenation of technology and artificially accelerated consumer whims gave birth to the dark twins of styling and obsolescence. There are three types of obsolescence: technological (a better or more elegant way of doing things is discovered), material (the product wears out), and artificial (the death-rating of a product; either the materials are substandard and will wear out in a predictable time span, or else significant parts are not replaceable or repairable). Since World War II our major commitment has been to stylistic and artificial obsolescence. (Ironically enough, the accelerated pace of technological innovation frequently makes a product obsolete before artificial or stylistic obsolescence can be tacked on to it.)

Honest design striving for true simplicity has recently been frighteningly rare. Television specials (e.g., CBS White Papers) and articles in magazines and newspapers have pointed out that U.S. military hardware seems to have gone the way of consumer products during the late 1970s and early 1980s. There now are "ease-o-matic" firing mechanisms in armored personnel carriers and tanks. Many fighter aircraft have been so cluttered with sophisticated electronics, on-board computers and in-board video gear that serious questions arise as to whether this equipment could stand the rigors of actual use. The abortive rescue attempt of U.S. hostages from Iran saw five out of eight helicopters—enormously well designed and engineered for testing in laboratories—fail to function in a desert climate and eventually crash into one another. Independent nations shopping for military supplies increasingly assemble their "dream lists" from rugged, fixable products made in Czechoslovakia, Brazil, East Germany, France, or Israel. Only when given major financial inducements do they reluctantly choose our high-tech offerings. The pop-up toaster mentality seems to govern even U.S. military hardware now.

Technological obsolescence has increased both in rate and scale. Especially in such fields as home computers, television, high-fidelity, cameras, and other electronic gadgets basic changes have come at a fast and furious pace. But a new direction is making itself felt: greater buying resistance on the part of the public. More and more people are beginning to realize that by waiting a year or two before buying an electronic device, they can leapfrog two or three generations of development and simultaneously pay lower prices, since greater production runs and improved manufacturing techniques lower consumer costs. In 1983 the simplest home computer keyboard (from England) costs \$50 and is smaller than a portable typewriter-a similar device thirteen years ago would have cost nearly \$9000 dollars and occupied a large room.

In the seventies and eighties the social environment within which design operates in the United States underwent another change, since the recession and new investment rules and tax laws have polarized society more than ever. Within the United States the poor are getting poorer and the rich are getting incredibly richer. The middle class is beginning to disappear. Abject poverty (previously, decorously hidden away like a demented maiden aunt in a nineteenth-century New England attic) has emerged as a major reality of life. There are children starving in Mississippi and South Carolina. There are vast population sinks in the large city ghettos, and embittered senior citizens from our rural areas, foiled in their attempts to "retire gracefully on \$150 a month at age 65," haunt the sleazy resorts of Florida, southern Texas, and Orange County, California, dreaming paranoid dreams of a restoration to the "good old days."

On a global scale the disparities between the haves and have-nots have become even more terrifyingly vast. Since 1960 this chasm has widened, with the declining birthrate in both North America and Western Europe and the fantastic population explosion in the rest of the world.

The oil crises of 1973, 1976, and 1979, combined with irresponsible loan policies to developing countries, have further divided the world. The increase in population in many of the poorer countries is finally being brought down to more manageable levels, although the repressive means used in the People's Republic of China to penalize a couple having more than one child was only a science fiction idea when this book was first written. The southern half of the globe still stands in abject need. Assuming that it has taken you twelve minutes to read so far in this chapter, 5,000 people have died of starvation in this time in the developing world. (Paul Harrison, The Third World Tomorrow. London: Pelican Books, 1981.)

It is impossible to have a world cleft in two: total need in the south and conspicuous consumption in the north. Cooperation is needed on many levels, such as exchange of health services, funded alternative energy research done in the southern half of the globe but funded by the north, interchange of crafts, skills, and techniques. With the growing interest in appropriate scale in the technologically developed countries, there are many methods that can be brought north. There have been loud calls for the redistribution of food supplies, in fact—except for temporary shortages caused by natural disasters—there is enough food to go around. There is a problem of food storage and preservation in which designers can help. Some ideas for this are demonstrated in a later chapter.

But, looking at conflicts in the Middle East, Iran, Central Africa, Laos, and Central America, it is clear that the world's trouble spots, sites of violent upheavals and savage wars, are mainly poor countries. The designer can play an important role: it has been pointed out earlier that because of their training industrial and product designers frequently assume key positions as trained synthesists. They speak the languages of many disciplines and can frequently help both on a village level and with export markets. Examples of this are scattered throughout the book.

Unless nutrition specialists, doctors, designers, engineers, and many others from both sides of the equator can bring a two-way exchange into being, Paul Harrison's apocalyptic vision may yet come true: "The third world war will start in the Third World. It will be a war of desperation by peoples forced into a position where they have nothing to lose."

In Never Leave Well Enough Alone, Raymond Loewy amusingly reminisces about the early years of his crusade, a crusade to get clients. In the late twenties and thirties he, together with other designers, kept knocking on corporate doors, such as those of General Motors, General Electric, General Rubber, General Steel, General Dynamics. In all fairness it must be admitted that he and his coworkers served their corporate masters well and, in fact, still do. It is dismaying to find that all too many of today's graduating design students also eagerly join corporate design staffs, safely wrapped in the cocoon of corporate expense accounts, company-paid country club membership, deferred annuities, retirement benefits, dread-disease coverage, and a yearly revitalizing visit to one of the stomping grounds of the corporate Gauleiters in New England or Aspen, Colorado.

In 1970 I advocated the need for a new crusade. Just as Raymond Loewy and others had visited potential clients in the 1920s and 1930s to show them what industrial designers could do, I felt that this could be done again but on a global scale. I advocated that young designers could go to developing countries, clinics, and hospitals and show what they can do. I suggested that it was up to the designer to knock on doors that had never opened before. Due to the civil rights movement in the United States, the ongoing concern for developing countries in northern Europe, the women's movement for equal rights, consumer associations, and the prescriptive writings of people like Fritz Schumacher, Rachael Carson, Ralph Nader, and myself, this struggle has now been started in part.

But it is 1984 now, and, at least in the technological countries, the choices facing a young designer seem mainly economic. Financial security is understandably of enormous importance to students and young designers. This brings a whole new dimension to designing for the poor and needy. The prime consideration now is a job. But to find too easy an accommodation within the military-industrial establishment is clearly not the answer. The designer is in a position where difficult moral and ethical choices have to be made. And there are many different ways of dealing with this ethical dilemma. Having been in close touch with my students from many countries during the last thirteen years, I have some rough idea of how they—now that they are professionals—-have dealt with this problem. Some have sold out to an employer and continue to design luxury items for a small privileged class. One may fault this approach, nonetheless it is a legitimate response to a difficult existential choice. Others have accepted my suggestion (in a later chapter) and contribute one-tenth of their time or one-tenth of their income to solving problems of abject need, while continuing with their jobs. Others have realized that the social changes of the last ten or so years are providing new opportunities for designers. This is especially true in the field of medical care and care for the handicapped and the aged. Still others have chosen to teach architecture or design and work as design consultants or free-lancers only on those jobs they consider socially important. Others have created entirely new professions for themselves: product evaluators for Ralph Nader or other consumer groups, design critics for a national industrial export organization, \* and so forth.

There are a few who have dropped out of design entirely and found that living and working a farm or cooking dccent meals for a restaurant are more acceptable to them than turning out objects for a wasteful society. Still others are seeing themselves as changing the system from within, in other words, trying to make their employer see that it is in his own interest to make better products. This last group tends to drift into small-scale enterprises, at least in the United States. This is not too surprising when we see an enormous amount of innovative talent in this country spent on paper deals and corporate mergers, rather than the making and selling of things that work. Finally there are a few who seem to find an answer to the dilemma between profit and social responsibility on a spiritual level only. They work either in or out of design and resolve any conflict between their work and their noral ideals through meditation or other spiritual activities.

Design for the sick and the handicapped has become a respectable activity now. In 1975 Design magazine wrote about me: "Papanek has been disliked, even loathed by his contemporaries; he has even been sneered at for his preoccupation with the non-profitable needs of Third World people; he has been accused of the single-minded subversion of design schools which previously had a reputation for industrial submissiveness." Eight years later 1 am delighted to see my former critics grown sleek on fat government and research grants, digging precisely into these areas.

This reassessment of the ethical dilemma faced by designers in 1984 is not to imply that the problems of the poor and needy have been solved. We have recognized more needs as genuine since we are more sensitive to voices raised in protest and despair. But in a few places and in many instances we have managed to swing the pendulum back the other way. In spite of a threatening economic situation, designers must contribute to real human and social needs. This will call for greater sacrifices and much more innovative work. The alternative is chaos.
