> 来源：The Image of the City (Harvard-MIT Joint Center for Urban Studies Series) (Kevin Lynch)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The Image of the City (Harvard-MIT Joint Center for Urban Studies Series) (Kevin Lynch)\The Image of the City (Harvard-MIT Joint Center for Urban Studies Series) (Kevin Lynch).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## The Role of Form

Nevertheless, having said so much about the flexibility and adaptability of human perception, we must now add that the shape of the physical world plays its part, as well. The very fact that skilled navigation arose in what would seem to be perceptually difficult environments indicates the influence of these outward shapes.

The ability to distinguish and orient in these resistant environments is not achieved without cost. The knowledge was usually limited to specialists. Rasmussen's informants who drew his maps were chiefs—many other Eskimos could not do it. Cornetz remarks that there were only a dozen good guides in all south Tunisia.13 The navigators in Polynesia were the ruling caste. Knowledge was transmitted from father to son, and there was, as mentioned above, a formal school in the subject on the island of Puluwat. It was customary for the navigators to eat at a separate mess, where the talk was constantly of directions and currents. This is reminiscent of Mark Twain's Mississippi River pilots, who were constantly discussing and riding up and down the river, and thus keeping abreast of its treacherous shifting landmarks.77 Admirable as this skill is, it is some distance from an easy and familiar relation with the environment. Polynesian sea voyages were evidently accompanied by real anxiety, a usual sailing formation being a long row of canoes abreast to aid in finding land. Among the Arunta of Australia, as another example, it is only the old men who can lead from water-hole to water-hole or who can correctly locate the proper sacred path in the mulga thicket. On the well-differentiated island of Tikopia, the problem could hardly come up.

We have frequent accounts of native guides who lose orientation in featureless surroundings. Strehlow describes floundering for hours in the Australian mulga thicket with an experienced native, who repeatedly climbed trees in the effort to get his bearings from distant landmarks.75 Jaccard recites the tragic cases of lost Touareg.37

At the other end of the scale, there are visual qualities in some landscape features which make them the inevitable subjects of attention, despite the selective power of the eye. Most often, sacredness is concentrated in the more striking natural features, such as the connection of the Ashanti gods with the great lakes and rivers, or the common reverence attached to great mountains. So in Assam there is a famous hill which is the legendary site of Buddha's death. It is described as bold and picturesque by Waddell, rising directly from a plain to which it is in sharp contrast. He then notes that it was worshipped by the aborigines long before, and has become holy for Brahmans and Mohammedans as well.78

For physical reasons, the great mountain on Tikopia Island is the central organizing feature. It is the crowning point of the island, both sociologically and topographically, the place of descent of the gods. It marks the location of home from far out to sea, and has an aura of the supernatural. Since the crest is rarely cleared and planted to taro, there is a peculiar fora here which is lacking down below, and this reinforces the special interest of the plac.19

Occasionally, a landscape may be so fantastically differentiated as to compel attention. Kawaguchi describes the banks of a river near Lake Kholgyal in Tibet:

.. . rocks piled up here and there, some yellow, some crimson, others he een, d om he purpth cks highly antasic, sme sharp and angular, ohers protruded ovr the river. The nearer bank . .  was full of queerly shaped rocks, and e of those rocks bore a name .  all these were objects of veneration to the common people.39

To take a humbler example, the territories defended by nesting birds in a meadow have been mapped over a succession of years. These territories show wide fuctuations and reorganizations, as might be expected from their occupation by different individuals. But certain perceptually srong boundaris o fence or brush remain stable throughout the shifts.50 Migrating birds, advancing in a general direction over a broad front, are known to direct their fight and follow along major "leading lines," or edges formed by topographic features such as seacoasts. Even swarms of locusts, who maintain cohesion and direction with reference to the wind, become disorganized and scattered when they move out over featureless water surfaces.

Other features may not only be noticeable and distinguishable but even have a "presence," a sort of animation or peculiarly vivid reality, that is felt by peoples of uttery different cultures. Kawaguchi speaks of a holy mountain in Tibet, seen for the first time ittig with an  gt oliy, d ikns it o h Buddha Vairochana, flanked by Bodhisattvas.39

A smlar experiencecosr  home, was the iginal impac a particular escarpment along the Oregon Trail:

as the west-bound party drew abreast of the bluffs a waveof astonishment swept through it. . Numerous observers discovered lighthouses, brick kilns, he capitol at Washington, Beacon Hil shot towers, churches, spires, cupolas, streets, workshops, stores, warehouses, parks, squares, pyramids, castles, forts, pillars, domes, minarets, temples, Gothic castles, 'modern'fortifications, French cathedrals, Rhineland castles, towers, tunnels, hallways, mausoleums, a Temple of Belus, and hanging gardens. Taken at a glance the rocks had the apparance of Cities, Temples, Castles, Towers, Palaces, and every variety of great and magnificent structures . . . splendid edifices, like beautiful white marble, fashioned in the style of every age and country. .

i pc calcal .

Therefore, while noting the flexibility of human perception, it must be added that outer physical shape has an equally important role. There are environments which invite or reject attention, which facilitate or resist organization or differentiation. This is analogous to the ease or difficulty with which the adaptable human brain can memorize associated or unassociated material.

Jaccard mentions several "classical locations" in Switzerland where people  consistently unable maintain directin. Peterson notes that the organization of his image of Minneapolis typically breaks down each time the street gridiron changes its orientation.52 Trowbridge finds that most people are unable to point to distant cities from New York without gross errors, but that Albany is an exception, since it is visibly linked by the Hudson River.76

In London, a small development called Seven Dials was built about 1695, consisting of seven streets which converged on a circular junction containing a Doric pillar bearing seven sun dials, each facing one of the radiating streets. Gay refers to the confusing shape of this area in his Trivia, although he implies that it is only the peasant, the stupid outsider, who could be befuddled by it.25

Malinowski draws a sharp distinction between the differentiated volcanic landscape of Dobu and the Amphletts in the D'Entrecasteaux Islands near New Guinea, versus the monotonous coral islands of the Trobriands. These island groups are connected by regular trading expeditions, and the concentration of mythical meaning in the Dobu area, as well as the reactions of the Trobrianders to this imageable volcanic landscape, is described in his pages. Speaking of the trip from the Trobriands to Dobu, Malinowski says:

The low strip of land, which surrounds the Trobriand lagoon in a wide sweep, thins away and dissolves in the haze, and before them the southern mountains rise higher and higher. . . . The nearest of them, Koyatabu, a slim, somewhat tilted pyramid, forms a most alluring beacon, guiding the mariners due south. . .. Within a day or two these disembodied misty forms are to assume what for the Trobrianders seems marvellous shape and enormous bulk. They are to surround the Kula traders with their solid walls of precipitous rock and green jungle. . . . The Trobrianders will sail deep, shaded bays . . beneath the transparent waters a marvellous world of multi-colored coral, fish and seaweed will unfold itself . . . they will also find wonderful heavy, compact stones of various shapes and colors, whereas at home the only stone is the insipid, white dead coral . . . besides many types of granite and basalt and volcanic tuff, specimens of black obsidian, with its sharp edge and metallic ring, and sites full of red and yellow ochre. . . . Thus the landscape now before them is a sort of promised land, a country spoken of in almost legendary tone.46

In a similar way, although the "dream-time" roads of Australia pass in every direction over a land which is largely level mulga plain, yet the legendary camp sites, the nodes of sacred history and attention, seem to be heavily concentrated in the two regions of differentiated landscape: the MacDonnell and the Stuart's Bluff Ranges.

Parallel to these comparisons of primitive landscapes we may put Eric Gills comparison of Brighton, England where he was born, to Chichester, to which he moved in his adolescence:

It had simply never occurred to me before that day that towns could have a shape and be, like my beloved locomotives, things with character and meaning . . . [Chichester] was a town, a city, a thing planned and ordered—no mere congeries of more or less sordid streets, growing, like a fungus, wherever the network of railways and sidings and railway sheds would allow. . . . I only knew that Chichester was what Brighton was not: an end, a thing, a place. . . . The plan of Chichester is clear and clean. . . . Over the Roman wall you could look straight out into the green fields. . . . Four straight wide main streets dividing the city into nearly equal quarters and the residential quarter similarly divided by four small streets and these almost completely filled with seventeenth- and eighteenth-century houses. ... But Brighton, as we knew it . . . well, there is simply nothing to be said about it. When we thought of Brighton, it was of a place of which the center was our home . . . there was no other. But when we lived in Chichester . . . the center was not No. 2 North Walls, but the Market Cross. We gained not only a civic sense but a sense of ordered relations generally. Brighton wasn't a place at alIt had never occurred to me that any other sort of town could exist.33

The perceptual clarity of the island of Tikopia, due to the presence of Mt. Reani, has already been mentioned. How a differentiated shape can be used in detail, is illustrated by this quotation:

When a Tikopia sets out from his native land his first estimates of n vle   o  n showing above the horizon. There are five principal points on the scale. The first is the rauraro, the lowland near the shore. When this disappears, the voyager knows he is some distance out. When the clifmato arising 200 to 300 feet in various spots round the coast become lost, another point is reached; then the uru mauna, the crests of the chain of hills ringing the lake, perhaps 500 to 800 feet in heght, sik below the waves.When the uru asthe last break in the contour of Mt. Reani, about 1000 feet) goes down, then the voyager realizes he is far out to sea; and when at last he sees the uru rnorono, the tiof the mountain itsel, vanish from sight, he greets the moment with sorrow.19

With the aid of a favorably differentiated landscape profile, this familiar phenomenon of parting has been regularized into accepted intervals, each with both practical and emotional meaning.

When a character in a novel by Forster returns from India, he senses with sudden shock, on entering the Mediterranean, the sheer form-quality of his surroundings, their imageability:

The buildings of Venice, lik the mountains o Crete and the felds of Egypt, stood in the right place whereas in poor India everything was placed wrong. He had forgotten the beauty of form among idol temples and lumpy hills; indeed, without form, how can there be beauty? .  . In the old undergraduate days he had wrapped himself up in the many-colored blanket of St. Mark's, but something more precious than mosaics and marbles was offered to him now: the harmony between the works of man and the earth that upholds them, the civilization that has escaped muddle, the spirit in a reasonable form, with flesh and blood subsisting. Writing picture post-cards to his Indian friends, he felt that all of them would miss the joys he experienced now, the joys of form, and that this constituted a serious bar.T ol  ues  Ve, not h
