> 来源：How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron\How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1. Expert Accelerationism

While advocating on behalf of the significance of design, especially when designers move “upstream” to sit alongside technoscientific researchers, Speculative Everything nevertheless tends to reinforce the superior status of technoscience. It is not questioned as a practice, so is instead recast as something we are just going to have to get better at adapting to. However, designers should instead be acting as what Don Ihde once called “science critics” (Ihde 1997). DnR hint at this without taking it far enough:

We [designers] can take research happening in laboratories and fast-forward to explore possible applications driven by human desire rather than therapeutic need … As designers, we need to shift from designing applications to designing implications by creating imaginary products and services that situate these new developments within everyday material culture. (Dunne and Raby 2014: 49)

The strategy here is related to what is currently being called “accelerationism,” a critical hyperbolization of current techno-libertarian tendencies. Designers need to use their capacity for “creative leaps” to rush scientific research to a diverse range of marketizable technologies. This is a race against what market-based Lean designers are employed to do anyway.

The difference with what DnR are proposing concerns the target audience. DnR pitch these rushed moral ambiguities to the general public for democratic consideration. But as Ulrich Beck (1994), Bruno Latour (2004), and Michel Callon (2009) – among others – have made clear, our modernist forms of democracy are not up for this kind of debate. Plus, this passing on of the issue allows the originating sciences to maintain an erroneous faith in their own pu - rity: there is their research, and very separate the commercialization of the implications of that research, something that is so separate that it is not their responsibility but instead the concern of every - one else, the public and its government who must police the evil market. By contrast, if the designer is sitting alongside the scientific researcher, sketching amoral or even immoral implications, then the scientific research expert is the audience. The critical designs can then impact the very people in a position to respond to those de - signs. Science would be more immediately contaminated by its own techno-profiting byproducts; and so a very different technoscience practice will need to be designed.
