> 来源：How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron\How We Intend to Future Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, ISpeculative Everything Design, Fiction, and Social (Tonkinwise, Cameron.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3. Seeing Round Corners

“As the science-fiction writer Frederick Pahl once remarked, a good writer does not think up only the automobile but also the traffic jam” (Dunne and Raby 2014: 49). As I have indicated, DnR do insist that material products are crucial for seeing these sorts of seeing second-order consequences. What they get wrong is why, and so how. This kind of generative foresight certainly does not come from contemplating a removed museological object. If these things are props, it is because you must play with them, performing in improvisatory ways. The point is not to imagine the future, but to feel your way in that unknown dimension. Products, especially specula - tive ones, demand enactment, bodystorming. By interacting with critical designs in these ways, and preferably over significant spans of time, the worlds that such things afford can be sensed. It is not just a matter, then, of seeing whether this or that design will work, but what the consequences of it being able to work will be. This is the essential perceptiveness of designing; the capacity to know reli - ably, without conventional metrics of validation, the patterns of use that will be likely as a result of this kind of material intervention into certain sets of everyday or workplace activities. That space between the possible and the plausible, but innovatively distinct from the probable – that is the space that designers can inhabit through their embodied precedent knowledge of habits and tastes. This is not the expertise of visioning wholly new futures, but exactly as DnR identify, the expertise of seeing what our now would do given that kind of future. Right now, when people are extolling that we should throw precaution to the winds and embrace trans-humanist possibilities, we need more than ever this foreknowledge that designers access through physicalized and enacted design prototypes.
