> 来源：Designing Interactions ( etc.)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Designing Interactions ( etc.)\Designing Interactions ( etc.).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3. Touch-points

Service touch-points are the tangibles that make up the total experience of using a service. Touch-points can take many forms, from advertising to personal cards, Web interactions, mobile phone and PC interfaces, bills, retail shops, call centers, and customer representatives. When we design services, we consider all touchpoints in totality and craft them in order to create a clear and consistent unified customer experience.

The time dimension helps the designer to map and understand the potential touch-points in a service. It helps to think of the analogy of a journey through the service experience and, as Ben explains, the important moments within the journey:

We have an interesting metaphor of on-ramps and off-ramps to services, so you’re not talking about the main road of content flowing through, but how people access it, how they leave it, what they do with it when they’re finished with it. It’s only when you build up enough touch-points around the service that it starts to feel multidimensional.

Chris thinks of these on-ramps and off-ramps as the transitions between the touch-points within the service:

Every service has a bill. Every service has an interface. But the way you transition in between those things is where the brand of the service can live; in-between experiences can be designed. As interaction designers, we might design a calendar on a mobile phone. As service designers, we provide the calendar on a mobile phone as one of the touch-points, but we also think about how the customer became aware that the calendar could exist on a mobile phone. We also think about the signing up process, the process of them first

entering their details, and then think about billing and receiving a bill for that service.
