> 来源：Modernism in Design (Reaktion Books - Critical Views) -- Paul Greenhalgh; Clive Wainwright; Tim Benton; Martin -- Illustrated, PT, 1997 -- Reaktion -- isbn13 9780948462115 -- 4f97a702ec3765c521b074fc2
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Modernism in Design (Reaktion Books - Critical Views) -- Paul Greenhalgh; Clive Wainwright; Tim Benton; Martin -- Illustrated, PT, 1997 -- Reaktion -- isbn13 9780948462115 -- 4f97a702ec3765c521b074fc2.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 4. Martin Gaughan: The Cultural Politics of the German Modernist Interior

1 Bauhaus, no. 1, Jg. 3 (1928), p. 10. All translations from the German are my own unless otherwise stated. Makart was the late nineteenth-century Viennese painter, popular with a certain section of the bourgeoisie. The eclectic clutter of his studio and house, including furniture and fittings from earlier European periods and exotic sources, was a model for his bourgeois patrons.

2 Jeffrey Herf's important study Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich (Cambridge, 1986) examines the way in which technological modernisation and modernising tendencies were assimilated into conservative and right-wing cultural ideology. In this essay I am using Walter Benjamin's theorising of the nature of commodity fetishism and its relationship to the phantasmagoric (see below). Marx had described the commodity as 'a very queer thing indeed, full of metaphysical subtleties and theological whimsies' (Capital, ch. 1, s. 4): commodity fetishism is a social process, masking the relations of production, displacing the social relationship from the producers and investing it in the product. Benjamin theorised commodity fetishism as 'producing hallucinations of identity out of which appear the phantasmagoria of men and commodities as weird, personified types'. Gillian Rose, The Melancholy Science (London, 1978) p. 42. The phantasmagoric arises from the denial of this relationship between the commodity and culture: it is 'the image that it (society) produces of itself and which it generally inscribes as its culture . . . when it distracts from the fact that it is producing commodities' (ibid.).

3 V. N. Volosinov, Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (New York, 1973), p. 23. (First published in Russian, 1927.)

4 This term 'sociological impressionism' is used, for instance, by David Frisby in his book Fragments of Modernity (Cambridge, 1988).

5 Quoted in Domus, 1988, p. 695.

6 London, 1983. Quotes below are from pp. 15 and 16. I am supplementing Berman's characterisation of the experience of modernity with Perry Anderson's commentary on it, 'Modernity and Revolution', New Left Review, no. I44. I have found Anderson's structure, 'the triangulation of forces', most useful to thinking through a politics of Modernism.

7 Jugendstil is the German form of Art Nouveau. The Werkbund was an association of industrialists, artists and designers, established in 19o7 to address the rôle of German design in the context of the 'ever expanding, drastically fluctuating, capitalist world markets', as described by Berman above.

8 W. Benjamin, Understanding Brecht (London, 1973). The Brecht-Lukács argument may be found in E. Bloch et al., Aesthetics and Politics (London, 198o), Afterword by Frederic Jameson.

9 Marshall Berman, All that is Solid Melts into Air (London, 1983).

10 L. Burckhardt (ed.), The Werkbund: Studies in the History and Ideology of the Deutscher Werkbund 1907-1933 (London, 1980), p. 22.

11 Ibid., p. 10.

12 M. Bradbury and J. McFarlane, Modernism (Harmondsworth, 1976), p. 26.

13 W. Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire: a Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism (London, 1983), p. 167. This passage is included in the fragments: 'Paris - the Capital of the Nineteenth Century'.

14 New Left Review, no. 164. pp. 2733.

15 Benjamin, Baudelaire, p. 168.

16 R. Hamann and J. Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur von 1870 bis zur Gegenwart, vol. 4: Stilkunst um 1900 (Munich, 1973).

17 Ibid., p. 252.

18 Ibid., p. 274.

19 Ibid., p. 273.

20 Gert Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland von 187o bis heute: Entwicklung der industriellen Produktkultur, Du Mont Dokument (Cologne, 1981). Selle contains some reproductions of 'declassed' Jugendstil.

21 Bernd Meurer and Hartmund Vinçon, Industrielle Asthetik: zu Geschichte und Theorie der Gestaltung, Werkbund Archiv, vol. 9 (Berlin, 1973).

22 Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 253.

23 Zwischen Kunst and Industrie: Der Deutsche Werkbund, Die Neue Sammlung (Munich, 1975), p. 38, 'Die Phantasie der Lebenseinrichtung erhebt sich zum Spezialberuf'. The Muthesius passage that follows is from p. 39.

24 Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 442, 'um dieser parvenuhaften Prätention eine bürgerliche Sachkultur entgegenzustellen'.

25 Zwischen Kunst and Industrie, p. 38 (see n. 23).

26 Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 452. These latter qualities, known as Biedermeier, were associated with the early nineteenth-century bourgeois interior, signifying simplicity, honesty, uprightness.

27 Meurer and Vinçon, Industrielle Asthetik, p. 1 10.

28 W. Rathenau, Von Kommenden Dinge (Berlin, I917), quoted in Hamann and Hermand, Epochen deutscher Kultur, p. 452.

29 The Dawes Plan (1924) was an American-backed financial arrangement to stabilise the German economy after the 1923 runaway inflation and massive social disruption. It paved the way for industrial rationalisation and mass-production methods, both of which would affect building programmes, as at Frankfurt or the Dessau Bauhaus.

30 H. Olbrich, 'Die "Neue Sachlichkeit" in Widerstreit der Ideologien und Theorien zur Kunstgeschichte des 20 Jahrhunderts', Weimarer Beitrage, Sonderdruck, H. 12 (1980), p. 74.

31 Bauhausbauten Dessau, vol. 12, Bauhaus Books, quoted in Hans M. Wingler, Bauhaus (Cambridge, Mass., 1986), p. 410.

32 Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland, p. 128.

3bid. A sociological study from the period by Lisbeth Franzen-Hellersberg, The Young Female Worker: Her Work Life and Life-style, suggests that young working-class women had a greater sense of reality, 'lacked the overheated illusions — which make the petty bourgeois teenagers prone to mistake novels and film dramas for reality'. There was stronger resistance to the representation of mass culture because of their participation in their own socialist culture. I am indebted to a recent article by Günther Berghaus for this information: 'Girlkultur', Journal of Design History. nos. 3-4, 1988.

34 Selle, Die Geschichte des Design in Deutschland, p. 129.

35 'SPD - Frauenwelt', H. 6, S. 13i, 1932, quoted in the catalogue 'Vorwärts — und nicht vergessen : Arbeiterkultur in Hamburg um 1930 (Hamburg, 1981), p. 76.

36 Published in Die Frau, vol. 28 (192o-I), and by M. Thomae, vol. 29 (1922). Details from Nicholas Bullock, Journal of Design History, nos. 3-4 (1988).

37 London, 1988.

38 Hamburg catalogue, p. 77 (see n. 35).

39The Taut brothers, Gropius and Moholy-Nagy, amongst others, represent this cultural politics. May was urban planner at Frankfurt, Wagner in Berlin. Hannes Meyer was Bauhaus director between 1928-30.

4 Design After Modernism: Beyond the Object (London, 1988), p. 22.

41 Charles S. Maier, Recasting Bourgeois Europe: Stabilisation in France, Germany and Italy in the Decade after World War I (Princeton, NJ., 1975).

42 The illustrations in a sense construct a narrative for the last five years of Weimar. 'The Frankfurt Kitchen', the type which Kallai may have had in mind, and the more generally reformist Wobnkultur interior stand in contrast to the socio-economic reality governing design Modernism and the larger constituency it attempted to address. Chancellor Brüning reduced wages and welfare payments in a period of rapidly rising unemployment.

4David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity (Oxford, 1989), p. vii.
