> 来源：Modernism in Design (Reaktion Books - Critical Views) -- Paul Greenhalgh; Clive Wainwright; Tim Benton; Martin -- Illustrated, PT, 1997 -- Reaktion -- isbn13 9780948462115 -- 4f97a702ec3765c521b074fc2
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Modernism in Design (Reaktion Books - Critical Views) -- Paul Greenhalgh; Clive Wainwright; Tim Benton; Martin -- Illustrated, PT, 1997 -- Reaktion -- isbn13 9780948462115 -- 4f97a702ec3765c521b074fc2.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 8. Gillian Naylor: Swedish Grace . . . or the Acceptable Face of Modernism?

I J. M. Richards, Memoirs of an Unjust Fella (London, 1980).

2 Charles Holme (ed.), Peasant Art in Sweden, Lapland and Iceland (London, 1910).

Quoted from Eric Zahle (ed., Scandinavian Domestic Design (Copenhagen, 1961), p. 56.

4 H. Muthesius, Stilarchitektur und Baukunst (Berlin, 1903), quoted from J. Posener, Anfange des Funktionalismus, von Arts and Crafts zum Deutscher Werkbund (Berlin, Frankfurt am Main, Vienna, 1964).

5 Quoted from Ulrich Conrads (ed.), Programmes and Manifestoes on Twentieth-Century Architecture (London 1970), pp. 2831.

6 G. Paulsson, Vackrare Vardagsvara (Stockholm, 1919), p. 42.

7 Ibid., p. 12.

8 Ibid., p. 24.

9 Nils G. Wollin, Modern Swedish Decorative Art (London, 193I), p. XI.

10 lbid., p. XII-XIII.

1 1 Hakon Ahlberg, Swedish Architecture of the Twentieth Century, with Preface by F. R. Yerbury (London, 1925). F. R. Yerbury was also associated with the Architectural Association, and with the Architectural Press.

12 Quoted from 'Stockholm 1930' by Kenneth Frampton, in Asplund (Stockholm, 1985), p. 37.

13 For a fuller account of Asplund's ideas at this time, see Swedish Design Exhibitions, 1917-3 1; unpublished MA thesis by Denise Hagströmer, Royal College of Art, 1990.

14 J. M. Richards describes P. Morton Shand ('he was always and in full P. Morton Shand') as 'a meticulously accurate journalist, but a difficult man, with a habit of taking irrational dislikes to people and a tendency to xenophobia, and especially to anti-semitism, strange in someone who led a very cosmopolitan life. His anti-semitism . . . being expressed for the most part in the form of jocular, schoolboyish quips repugnant nevertheless . . .' Richards, Memoirs of an Unjust Fella, p. 123.

15 J. M. Richards, An Introduction to Modern Architecture (Harmondsworth, 1940), pp. 91-2.

16 For further details of the Dorland Hall exhibition, and British reactions to it, see Denise Hagströmer, Swedish Design Exhibitions.
