> 来源：Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# 4 Ingredients of the Design Process: a Comparison between Group and Individual Work

Srinivasan Dwarakanath and Luciënne Blessing University of Cambridge, UK

Engineering design research focuses more and more on detailed studies of individual and group design behaviour to increase understanding of the design process both as a social and as a cognitive process. The main reasons are the increasing need to improve the design process and hence the resulting product, and the need to develop effective tools and user interfaces. The availability of techniques developed in cognitive psychology, sociology, and computer science for analysing human behaviour, and technological developments such as video recording, support these needs by providing the methods and tools for detailed observation and analysis.

This paper discusses the results of a descriptive, comparative study of two design processes executed in a laboratory environment. One process involved an individually working designer who was asked to think aloud; the other involved a group of three designers. Both processes were recorded on video and transcribed into protocols. The protocol analysis focused on the differences and similarities in the ingredients of the two processes. The results provide a first step towards a better understanding of the differences between group and individual work.

A descriptive design study is defined as an investigation of the way in which a design process actually occurs. This investigation

<table><tr><td>Environment</td><td>Method</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Laboratory:</td><td>22 studies</td><td rowspan="3">Observation:</td><td>18 studies</td></tr><tr><td>13 sources</td><td>9 sources</td></tr><tr><td>177 cases</td><td>131 cases</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3">Combination:</td><td>4 studies</td></tr><tr><td>4 sources</td></tr><tr><td>46 cases</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Industry:</td><td>32 studies</td><td rowspan="3">Observation:</td><td>11 studies</td></tr><tr><td>28 sources</td><td>7 sources</td></tr><tr><td>951 cases</td><td>11 cases</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3">Retrospective:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14 studies</td></tr><tr><td>14 sources 920 cases</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3">Combination:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7 studies</td></tr><tr><td>7 sources 20 cases</td></tr></table>

Figure 4.1 Context of descriptive studies in mechanical engineering (until 1993) (54 studies, 41 data sources, 1128 cases)

can be: (1) real-time, e.g. by observing designers; (2) retrospective, e.g. by means of interviews and questionnaires; (3) a combination of these and/or other techniques. The investigation can take place in industry or in a laboratory. Figure 4.1 shows a summary of descriptive design studies in the domain of mechanical engineering (for more details see Blessing²). Some of the 54 studies are based on the analysis of (part of) the same data source, i.e. on the same set of cases. They have been included because they address different design research issues. The actual number of data sources was 41, covering 1128 cases (i.e. subjects, groups or companies). Studies that only involved students were not included.

As this overview shows, the majority of cases have been analysed in industry. This is mainly due to the use of retrospective methods, such as questionnaires, as they allow for large numbers of cases to be investigated in one study. The disadvantages of thee methods linhe time-lapse between the event taking lace and being reported, and the technique of capturing data. The consequences are fewer details of the observed process compared to real-time, introspective techniques, and possible bias of data, among others, because of the inevitable distortion that occurs in interviewing (see Ackroyd and Hughes² for a discussion of the latter).

The number of cases per study is far less in a laboratory environment. In general these studies focus on individually working designers. Of the 22 laboratory studies only four focused on design teams. Again this is mainly caused by the type of method applied. Simultaneous verbalization (where designers are asked to think aloud while designing) with video-recording provides very detailed, real-time data, but requires much effort to analyse. This is the reason that only a few cases can be addressed in a single study. Studies involving the observation of a larger number of cases in laboratory situations usually focus on one specific research aspect, and involve students only.

All the listed studies are descriptive, but of these only few are comparative. In comparative studies the cases are deliberately divided beforehand into two or more groups. This division might be based on the designers' experience (e.g. Schindler³3), the amount of information in the assignment (e.g. Fricke4), or the tool that is being used (e.g. Blessing1). Comparative design studies are very difficult to execute, in particular if the aim is to generalize the results and draw consequences for practice1. However, they are extremely important for measuring the effects of new methods and tools, and to reveal the context in which the findings are valid. This is essential for the development of effective methods and tools for designers.

Design is a social activity. In industry, designers work a substantial part of their time with others. Hales found in the project he observed in industry, that no more than 40% of the effort was carried out by people working alone. Minneman6 observed that groups communicated not only product data but also process data and the relationship between the groups. The importance of group work is also emphasized by several other authors8 However, not all parts of a design process are equally suitable for execution in a group. One of the more interesting studies, therefore, is the comparison between individually working designers and those working in a group. Such a study may reveal which tasks can be executed more effectively or efficiently by an individual, and which ones by a group of designers. A comparison may also suggest how to support individuals and how to support groups, and may thus provide specific requirements for methods and tools for individuals and those for groups. This requires a detailed understanding of the differences and similarities

Figure 4.2 Abstract of the protocol

between the two ways of working. This goal led the analysis of the Delft protocol data described in this paper.

The analysis focused on the identification of the ingredients of the two design processes. Comparisons have been made between:

the group as a whole and the individual

the individual group members

the individual group members and the individual.

The protocols provided by the workshop organizers were transferred to a spreadsheet and the utterances of the designers split into individual events (see Figure 4.2). Every line in the spreadsheet represents an event. An event is any meaningful piece in a protocol, i.e. any piece that contains information. This is related to the aim of the analysis and partially to the categories used in the classification schemes. A new event starts when a new piece of information is addressed or when something new happens, e.g. when a new category is addressed in one of the classification schemes. In the group protocol a new event also starts when a different group member starts speaking. The protocol was divided into events prior to the actual analysis. During the analysis only small changes had to be made. Each event was linked to the elapsed design time in seconds, measured at the end of this event.

<table><tr><td>Design time</td><td>Event time</td><td>Event</td></tr><tr><td>0:41:26</td><td>0:00:13</td><td>OK I have spent er fortyfive minutes or so now forty minutes doing that er so em</td></tr><tr><td>0:41:34</td><td>0:00:08</td><td>(mutter) going to check every possible location</td></tr><tr><td>0:41:38</td><td>0:00:04</td><td>here alright so we do have one that comes up front</td></tr><tr><td>0:41:47</td><td>0:00:09</td><td>em really a little bit wary about backpacks on em fronts of bikes</td></tr><tr><td>0:41:55</td><td>0:00:08</td><td>em let&#x27;s see if we can em</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:00</td><td>0:00:05</td><td>and there is that issue of it being off the side . ..</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:10</td><td>0:00:10</td><td>you know from the aesthetics standpoint everybody likes things symmetric</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:14</td><td>0:00:04</td><td>and er this is not that big a pack</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:19</td><td>0:00:05</td><td>em my initial tests indicate I probably couldn&#x27;t have one right like that</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:21</td><td>0:00:02</td><td>certainly I would not do it this way</td></tr><tr><td>0:42:23</td><td>0:00:02</td><td>I would do it that way</td></tr></table>

The duration of an event varied between one second and almost two minutes. On average an event in the individual's protocol lasted 7.2 seconds, an event in the group protocol only 2.7 seconds. The medians were two and six seconds respectively. This difference is not only caused by the fact that more statements were uttered in groups, but group members also talked at the same time, and regularly reacted with short utterances. This increased the number of events. The number of events in the individual's protocol was 1026; in the group's protocol it was 2684. The actual analysis of the design processes was based on the transcriptions, on viewing of the video tapes, and on the project data documented by the designers.

Several classification schemes are possible for an analysis. The analysis categories used in this paper are considered to represent the ingredients of a design process. They had been defined and used by the authors in earlier studies.

To analyse the processes each event was linked to the ingredient it addressed. This depended on the contents of the event, and on the context in which it was uttered. The basic ingredients were: Issues, Arguments, Alternatives, Criteria, Decisions, External information, and Others. This categorization was based on work in the area of representing design rationale, e.g. by Conklin and Yakemovic and Lee and Lai10. It has been extended and detailed during the analysis of several other protocols by the first author (in preparation). Appendix A gives the definitions of the basic and the detailed categories as used in this paper.

Additional detail was provided by categorizing the reasons given by the designers for rejecting or accepting a solution, and by drawing a decision tree of the process. The different types of reasons used are based on the analysis of a design process in industry1 and the work of Hubka11. A decision tree shows the different problems and sub-problems addressed in a design process by presenting the alternatives that were considered and the decisions made. Decision trees were used by, among others, Marples12 and Guindon 13.
