> 来源：Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 3 Limitations

## 3.1 Limitations of the Experiment

represent the decomposition of problems into sub-problems. The broken lines indicate the rejected paths in the design process. The time (hh:mm:ss) shown in the figures indicates when during the design process a particular problem/alternative was first identified and when an explicit decision was taken. All explicit decisions in the individual's tree have been timed. In the decision tree for the group only the explicit decisions for the top level subproblems have been timed.

Figure 4.12 shows that the individual designer started exploring solutions after understanding the problem. The timing of the decisions reveals that he made decisions at each level before going down to the next level of sub-problems. The group applied a different approach. After an initial brainstorming session in which they generated several alternatives, the group started systematically identifying the sub-problems. Then they went on to list the alternatives generated earlier and also generated new alternatives for the identified sub-problems as shown in Figure 4.13. They evaluated the generated alternatives systematically (one by one) and then made decisions for the same level subproblems at about the same time (between design time 1:13:00 and 1:20:00). The group generated more alternatives than the individual.

The group worked more problem-oriented. The individual worked more solution-oriented. These observation have also been made during the analysis of other protocols by Dwarakanath (in preparation). A possible reason is that if a group member is deeply involved in working on a solution, the other group members are less involved and therefore in a better position to maintain an overview. Besides, each of the group members has a different perspective on the problem. An individually working designer has to come out of his involvement with the product to reflect on the problem he tries to solve.

The results of the comparison described in this paper have to be viewed in the light of the limitations that are inherent to the experiment and to the analysis method.

The experimental limitations are related to the request to think aloud, the number of cases, the type of assignment, the type of environment, and the subjects. Each aspect will be discussed briefly.

The individual designer was asked to think aloud to be able to record his process. Though considered to be easy to learn and not very distracting, thinking aloud might have changed the individual's way of working. For example, it might have increased his awareness of his own design process. At one time the individual designer says: 'I assume the camera is watching me'. Group work, on the contrary, requires the communication of thoughts. Therefore, there is no need to ask the designers to think aloud to record the design process, i.e. to change their way of working in this respect.

The number of protocols that has been analysed is limited to two. Therefore this study can only give a first indication of differences and similarities that might be worth investigating further. The first author is currently working on a comparison of the results of this study with those of other protocol studies in which he used the same analysis method.

In choosing an assignment for this type of experiment, a tradeoff has to be sought between time (for both subject and researcher), reality of the problem, and suitability for an individual and group of designers. The results are that the assignment is relatively small, does not require specialist knowledge, and is solvable within a few hours by an individual. More complex problems might show differences especially in group work. There might be more need to collaborate, and specialist knowledge might force group members into different roles. However, in order to compare individuals and groups, the problem should be solvable by an individual. This problem is inherent to this type of comparative analysis. The fixed, relatively short time available influenced the design process, as became clear from the statements of the designers (and from other studies). The assignment is also limited because it does not require a complete design process. Depending on the specific research question, this may have a desirable or problematic effect.

A laboratory environment restricts the number of influences on the design process and thus the variables in a study. Although this is an advantage for comparative research, it also implies that a laboratory environment is less suitable for analyses of how design actually takes place. The designers had to work in a room, not familiar to them, where every action and utterance were observed and recorded. They were not surrounded by their own 'tools' and had to work with the information provided. Besides, they could not let the problem settle overnight or while doing some other work. The individual, in addition, could not communicate with other designers. Some of the designers referred to this situation by expressing what they would normally do. This might have affected the ability to design and thus the results of the analysis. However, this is expected to be the same for every designer involved in the study. Besides, in a comparative analysis the main requirement is similarity of environment. An industrial environment cannot provide this if several experiments have to be executed.

When the results have to be used to determine how to support individuals and groups, it is also necessary to have an understanding of the differences between the two ways of working in an industrial context, as improving design processes in industry should be the ultimate aim of design research. Most of the detailed descriptive studies, however, focus on individual designers in laboratory situations, rather than on groups in industry. This includes two contextual differences: group versus individual, and industry versus laboratory. The latter is not addressed in this study. The results should therefore be considered as an indication of topics for further research.

The subjects were all experienced designers, but their level and type of experience varied. The individual designer had more than 20 years of experience with an emphasis on electro-mechanical work. Two of the group members had five years of experience, the third group member eight years of experience. Their emphasis was on mechanical design. Several studies showed that the years of experience can have a considerable effect on the time needed to fulfil the assignment and on the way in which people work1,14,15. This could thus have affected the findings described in this paper. Another limitation is that the subjects had to work either alone or in a group throughout the design process. In practice, design consists of a combination of individual and group work. How this affects the findings is unclear. One could argue that it restricts both the individual and the group. However, the effect of having no one to work with and the effect of having to work in a group all the time might be different.

Another subject-related limitation of this type of study is what Denzncall the demand-characteristic effect.Subjects are not passive objects. They do not have to obey the role set for them in the experiment. However, 'subjects will persist in their assignment' because 'the norm of the role of subject is to be a good subject; to be a good subject demands that one interprets ambiguous meanings and assignments in a context that values participation'. This does not prevent problems, as this interpretation might cause subjects to proceed in a way that was not intended by the experimenter. In the experiment this might have resulted in designers working more systematically than usual. As this will apply to all designers, in the experiment, this is assumed not to have caused differences.

Another implication of an experimental situation is that for the subjects, the design problem is a stand-alone problem. The designers do not necessarily have experience in designing a similar kind of product. In industry it is common to have this experience at least within the company. Besides, nothing depends on the solution, for which reason the incentive to aim at an optimal solution can be low. A satisfactory solution would do. Compensating factors might have been the demand-characteristic effect (see previous paragraph) and the fact that the processes would be analysed. Again, these factors are expected to be the same for all designers in the study.

The analysis of protocols has its specific limitations. This section focuses on the limitations related to 'parallel' events and the difference between individual and group data.

Video recordings and their protocols can be analysed in a variety of ways as the papers in this volume show. One of the basic activities involved in protocol analysis is the division of the protocol into units that are coded according to a classification scheme. Various schemes can be applied, depending on the aim of the study, and the sources used to develop the scheme can differ. Another clear difference is the way in which the protocol has been divided: event-based (as elementary, and very generic, events, and to a large extent prior to the actual analysis); category-based (during the analysis); and time-based (e.g. every 15 seconds). Which approach is most suitable depends on the level of detail required to achieve the aim of the study. The approach used in this paper has been mainly event-based, and to some extent category-based.

The use of protocol analysis for group work introduces several difficulties and, thereby, limitations compared to its use for individual work. Often the different group members are involved in different activities or talk at the same time, and they do talk more than individuals. Apart from posing problems on transcribing the video recordings, one has to be careful with the analysis. When people are speaking at the same time, and the time for each event is recorded, this will affect calculations based on the event time. In the study described in this paper, we recorded 0 seconds for each of the parallel events that consisted of short confirmations (such as 'yes', 'indeed'). Often utterances are repeated for confirmation. This might distort the results when counting specific events is important, in particular when this is done automatically.

One also has to be careful in interpreting the sequence of events in a group as the design process or approach, as is common for analyses of individual processes. As the findings in the previous sections showed, activities take place in parallel and the individual thought processes continue independent of the group process. The sequence of events in a protocol is, therefore, likely to consist of events of sometimes different processes existing in parallel and related to each group member. It seems difficult to untangle these processes.

A detailed comparative analysis requires the same data collection and analysis methods to be used for all cases involved. Therefore the same methods were used to study the individual and the group. However, the previous paragraphs made clear that the collected data are likely to differ, which implies that any differences or similarities that are found in an analysis of these data, might be the result of differences in collected data rather than differences or similarities between individuals and groups.
