> 来源：Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Analysing Design Activity -- edited by Nigel Cross, Henri Christiaans, Kees Dorst -- Chichester, New York, England, 1996 -- John Wiley  Sons, -- isbn13 9780471960607 -- 8e770c44116b8564e0def685642b1a.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1 Goal

The goal of this protocol study is to verify and refine models of product information evolution and the decision making process. These are both areas of importance in the development of advanced computer aided design tools1, an area of long term and continuing research at Oregon State University. Note that the goal focuses on both the information that describes the artifact during its evolution from a need to a final set of product specifications and the design process that supported this evolution. In earlier work based on individual protocols, the evolution of product information was studied and modelled². This model has continued to evolve since the publication of the earlier paper.

Information about the product can be modelled by two basic constructs, the features of objects (object-attribute-value) and the features of relations between objects (object 1-object 2-relationship-attribute-value). Here an 'object' is defined as an assembly, a component, a feature, a human or other identifiable physical thing that is used to describe some physical aspect of the product being designed. This model differs from most others in that it emphasizes the importance of relationships between objects in the evolution of components. In fact, much of what is commonly referred to as the functionality of a component is realized through the relationships between objects³. Typical attributes (i.e. features) of objects include geometry, energy, information and material state, physical properties, material properties, production information, etc.

The protocol data will be used to show the evolution of a single object, the 'stay' in terms of the development of its attributes and values. For relationships between two objects, typical attributes are:

Position Relationship: What is their relative location and orientation?

Connection Relationship: How are they physically connected? (degrees freedom, type o connection, rgidiy conetion, part-of)

Transmission Relationship: What is transmitted between them? (energy, materials or information transmission)

This relationship model will be used to explain part of the evolution of the stay and will be the focus of discussion about the location and orientation of the pack relative to the bicycle (i.e. its position relationship). The decisions involved in determining the location and orientation will be modelled as described below.

The second half of the goal, to study the decision making process is based on a fairly simple model of decision making. This model has been used with success by a number researchers4 In this model, the major construct is an issue. A design issue is any question or problem identified by the designers that needs to be resolved. An issue may be the need to fulfil design requirements (i.e. criteria, constraint), the need to establish a value for some design object parameter, or the desire to determine the next part of the design problem to work on. Some important points about issues are: (1) issues are often dependent on the resolution of other issues; (2) while focused on an issue, sub-issues are developed; and (3) issues can be focused on the product (the object being designed) or on the design process (e.g. what to do next) and these two types are often interwoven with each other.

The source of the criteria has proved to be important in understanding the development of information in a design session. In earlier work² three sources of criteria were identified. Given criteria are imposed on the problem from outside the design space. They may be part of the original problem statement or imposed on the design problem by the solution of other components of the problem not under the control of the designer responsible for the problem under consideration. Introduced criteria are those criteria brought to the problem by the designer based on specific domain knowledge. Derived criteria arise as a consequence of earlier design decisions. Each change in the objects or their relationships puts new constraints on all downstream decisions. Thus, what seems like an unimportant decision early in the design process can have major effects later on in the design process.

It is interesting to note the frequency with which these different types of constraints appear during a design process. In a study that traced the evolution of a component², the types of criteria used during conceptual, layout and detail design activities were identified (Table 8.1). The values were based on 725 constraints used during the development of the component. As can be seen from the data in Table 8.1, given constraints rapidly give way in importance to derived constraints.

Table 8.1 Constraint types found in earlier empirical study
<table><tr><td>Design phase</td><td>Derived</td><td>Given</td><td>Introduced</td></tr><tr><td>Conceptual</td><td>29%</td><td>70%</td><td>1%</td></tr><tr><td>Layout</td><td>79%</td><td>10%</td><td>11%</td></tr><tr><td>Detail</td><td>84%</td><td>7%</td><td>8%</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>75%</td><td>17%</td><td>8%</td></tr></table>

During an issue a number of alternative solutions are proposed. An alternative is an option generated by the design team for the resolution of a particular design issue. Any number of alternatives may be developed to resolve a design issue. Some important points about alternatives are: (1) alternatives are developed by various members of the design team; (2) the information known about an alternative is often incomplete; (3) alternatives are often dependent on the resolution of other issues or alternatives; (4) often an alternative will introduce new subissues; (5) alternatives to solve one issue may be inconsistent with those to solve another issue; (6) alternatives can be at different levels of abstraction (e.g. some are vague ideas and others refined, virtually completed designs) and language (e.g. text, sketches, physical objects). Additionally, each alternative is put forth with varying levels of knowledge about how well it will satisfy the criteria.

Arguments are given for and against the alternatives. An argument is the rationale for either supporting or opposing a particular alternative. Arguments perform evaluation as they are comparisons that identify the relative merits or demerits of a particular alternative. These comparisons are made either between alternatives relative to a criterion or between an alternative and a criterion (see page 169 in Reference 7 for a discussion). Some important points about arguments are: (1) arguments are made with varying levels of confidence, knowledge and abstraction; (2) arguments are posed by various members of the design team; and (3) arguments may be inconsistent with each other.

Alternatives and arguments raise new issues. These new issues increase the interdependence of the information and must be addressed in future activities. Information interdependence is most common during the design process. In a study of how a single component came into existence² researchers found that very early in the design process 70% of the information used in arguments for resolving issues was from the initial specifications. By the end of the project, however, 75% of this information on the shape, dimensions, tolerances, and function of the components was based on the result of design decisions. Most of the decisions that specified the final component were made on issues and their sub-issues that did not exist initially and a majority of the effort was spent on interdependent design issues.

A decision weighs the arguments supporting or opposing the alternatives for a particular issue. The effect of the decision is either to accept, reject, or modify an alternative, or to leave the issue pending while others are addressed. The history of the design process is the chronological sequence of decisions that relate progress on the design project6. The same issue revisited after gathering more information may yield a different decision. Here, the first decision on the original issue will probably be to gather more information about the alternatives and arguments, have another meeting in a couple of days and make a refined decision at that time. Thus, decision making is a dynamic activity.

Issue, alternatives and criteria can all be modelled as objectattribute-value or Object 1-Object 2-relationship-attribute-value information. This will be shown in the observations from the protocol studied here.
