History of Design: Decorative Arts and Material Culture, 1400–2000

Pat Kirkham and Susan Weber (eds), Yale University Press, 2013. 704 pp., 760 illus, cloth, £50.00. ISBN: 9780300196146

This review complements Carla Cesare’s primary review of Pat Kirkham and Susan Weber’s edited volume, by giving special attention to the texts in the book focused on Asian, namely Japanese, histories. It primarily explores the extent to which the publication realizes its commitment to the plurality of histories and the claim, stated by the editors, that ‘[. . .] this book, by its scope at least, contributes to current concerns for international, transnational, and global histories’ (p. xii). The texts in the book were organized with this goal in mind and with the aim of responding to a current discourse that emphasizes the relevance of a methodological approach that is global and/or transnational, and which seeks to present a balanced history of design in Euroamerica and elsewhere.

Kirkham and Weber’s History of Design appears as a response to the expansion of the field together with a number of publications focused on design history, that themselves built upon debate and conferences conducted in numerous spaces, including the pages of this journal. In 1999, design historian Anna Calvera identified two approaches for globalizing design history: the first focuses on the creation of a common, large narrative of the world history of design, open-minded enough to be shared by different regions or nations. This approach operates from the general to the particular. The second research direction builds upon the search for appropriate comparisons between local, or rather national, identities that are notable for their differences; this works from the particular to the general and, through sharing particularities, introduces new interpretative models that can be adapted to local realities.1 Kirkham and Weber’s publication adopts the first approach, the common, large narrative.2

Kirkham and Weber, together with their team of scholars, invest an admirable effort in producing a well-organized textbook that introduces design history to its students in a holistic and inclusive manner, reflecting the call for incorporation of multicentred/national and local histories into the global history of design.

The clean and clear structure of the book is one of its most notable features and appropriately reflects the book’s goal of becoming one of the primary text books in the field. However, it may have slightly compromised the realistic flow of history for the sake of overall composition and balance among the regions, in a way that actually seems to champion non-Euroamerican areas. For example, in the initial sections of the book, a relatively large number of essays on Asian design history are followed by only one longer co-authored essay on Europe, that strays from the regionally organized order of the Asian section. Perhaps a strict and seemingly equal structure would not be necessary if the book’s structure highlighted more of the contemporary connections, areas relating to multiple nations and exchanges among them, rather than large regions. This structural question may be, as suggested earlier, better realized in the digital, rather than printed format.

Kirkham and Weber’s book aims to reflect and teach the intricate and complex narrative of the history of design across the empires and the nations of the world, one reflected in the essay headings and the overall structure but which could be developed even further. Dynamic movement of transnational flows and the hybrid outcomes in design resulting from it—for example, design produced by diasporic, newly established communities around seas, lakes and rivers—and other histories involving fusions in terms of race, nationality and culture, seem to be underrepresented, and exchanges in design are still portrayed as bilateral, inter-Asian or international. In the Japanese context, these transnational flows and networks became one of the key factors shaping Japanese Modernism. The transnational experience of Japanese designers involved training and working all over the world, including India and Mexico. Foreign designers practicing in Japan in the trans-war period, who often had transnational experience from Europe and elsewhere, were also important players in the process of forming Japanese Modernism.3 To cover an alternative cartography of design histories to that presented in this publication would require a minor re-organization of the book, perhaps settling on topical organization of the essays, rather than on the more traditional and less flexible materials/media/techniques-led organization of the individual texts.

As a whole, the publication seems to echo James Elkins’ proposition to draw on the methods which Western art history developed to maintain coherence for the project of building a global/world art history.4 But drawing on the alternative method devised by Piotr Piotrowski, in which he rejects the Western method in order to highlight the local production of art, described as horizontal and polyphonic, may be also fruitful. As a part of this new, horizontal methodology, Piotrowski re-conceptualizes the very meaning of a centre-and-periphery relationship and argues for reconsidering the notion of ‘world art history’, pointing out the question posed quite recently by Suzana Milevska: ‘“Can such art history exist at all outside the aforementioned geographical dichotomies? It certainly cannot”.’5 Drawing on these recent methodologies, it seems Kirkham and Weber could have addressed more clearly their approach to the issues of ‘global’ or ‘transnational’, as well as their definition of ‘world’ and ‘history’, and, lastly, how these concepts informed the structure of the book.

A minor remark deserves to be made regarding the consistency of standard name order that is particularly relevant to Japanese names and surnames. Some factual errors and misunderstandings appear in relation to the Mingei movement in both Japanese and North American sections. Future editions of this valuable publication could be improved by inviting local specialists to consult the essays in terms of factual and contextual details and terminology.

These minor criticisms aside, this book is a significant achievement that will effectively serve students entering the field of design history. The high quality images, which obviously have an important role in teaching about design objects that are not ordinarily available, enables the reader to appreciate the beauty, the details and, importantly, the realistic colours of the works. Crucially, the essays present not only established narratives about the network of histories, but also some new pieces of scholarship and research. This publication will no doubt continue to contribute to education in many future editions to come.

doi:10.1093/jdh/epv042   
Advance Access publication 12 October 2015   
Helena Čapková   
Assistant Professor   
School of International Liberal Studies, Waseda University,   
Tokyo   
E-mail: helena.capkova@gmail.com

## Notes

1 D. J.  Huppatz, ‘Globalizing Design History and Global Design History’, Journal of Design History vol. 28, no.  2, 2015, p. 189.

2 The second, comparative approach suggested by Calvera, was employed in the equally significant publication Global Design History (Routledge, London, 2011), edited by Glenn Adamson, Giorgio Riello and Sarah Teasley, in which short essays illustrate alternative approaches. The editors set out to correct what they claimed was ‘the dominant, lopsided representation of the history of design as occurring primarily in Western Europe and the United States’.

3 H. Čapková, ‘Transnational Networkers—Iwao and Michiko Yamawaki and the Formation of Japanese Modernist Design’, Journal of Design History, vol. 27, no.  4, 2014, pp. 370–85.

4 J. Elkins (ed.), Is Art History Global?, Routledge, New York & London, 2007.

5 P. Piotrowski, ‘On the Spatial Turn, or Horizontal Art History’, Umeni/Art, no. 5, 2008, pp. 378–83.