> 来源：Perspective Linking Design Thinking with Innovation Outcomes through Cognitive Bias Reduction (Liedtka, Jeanne)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Perspective Linking Design Thinking with Innovation Outcomes through Cognitive Bias Reduction (Liedtka, Jeanne)\Perspective Linking Design Thinking with Innovation Outcomes through Cognitive Bias Reduction (Liedtka, Jeanne).md
> 识别方式：一二级标题

## Researching the Practice of Design Thinking

Despite this consensus on the core processes and tools involved in design thinking, the task of bringing rigorous empirical testing to assess the outcomes produced by a practice comprised multiple and diverse stages and tools, and establishing causality with complex multidimensional outcomes like innovation performance is a challenging one. Recently, systematic fieldwork has begun to emerge that seeks to explore the use of design-thinking methodologies in practice as used by nondesigners. For instance, Seidel and Fixson (2013) review the performance of design methodologies as practiced by 14 novice multidisciplinary product development teams, finding that combined methods and attention to more reflective practices are key to producing more innovative outcomes. Wattanasupachoke (2012) studied Thai businesses, exploring the self-reported relationship between the use of design methodologies and firm performance, finding that usage increased the firms’ innovativeness scores but did not relate directly to firm performance. Carlgren (2013) and her colleagues Elmquist and Rauth studied the implementation of design thinking across an array of firms and explored it in depth in a health-care delivery organization, examining the link between organizational culture and the implementation of design thinking, and finding evidence of performance improvements beyond the innovativeness of the solutions the method produced.

As we explore how to expand this research, we can look to a larger body of work available on the study of other practices. Orilkowski (2010) has argued that a practice may be studied from three perspectives: with an emphasis on the phenomenon of practice, or on the perspective of practice, or on its philosophy and ontology. All three are possibly fruitful avenues for the study of design thinking. In the remainder of this essay, I will focus on the phenomenon of practice lens. Within this, design thinking can be studied in multiple ways: it might be compared with other problem-solving approaches, with an eye toward identification of the specific environmental and organizational conditions under which it yields superior outcomes, or conversely, its integration with other organizational approaches could be examined. Even at this level, researchers must make choices in how to frame their focus: do they want to examine design thinking as a unified concept, including its philosophy and inclusive of an end-to-end process and a complete toolkit; or, instead, to examine particular tools or elements of the process? A diversity of levels could be addressed as well: the practice could be examined at the level of the individual, the team, or the organization. For instance, how does design thinking impact organizational or team sense making? Or facilitate different organizational or team learning outcomes? At the individual level, questions related to its impact on affect or on psychological safety or on risk-taking behavior could be scrutinized, among many others. In fact, bringing rigorous empirical scrutiny to the design-thinking process could itself be construed as a “wicked” problem: the “problem” can be defined in many different ways (dependent upon the perspective taken by the stakeholder in question) and is situated in an environment of sufficient complexity that definitive arguments for any one “best” approach would clearly be foolish—a case can be made for any of these research approaches.

Table 3. Flaws in Cognitive Processing and Their Consequences for Innovative Problem Solving
<table><tr><td>Cognitive Bias</td><td>Description</td><td>Innovation Consequences</td></tr><tr><td>Projection bias</td><td>Projection of past into future</td><td>Failure to generate novel ideas</td></tr><tr><td>Egocentric empathy gap</td><td>Projection of own preferences onto others</td><td>Failure to generate value-creating ideas</td></tr><tr><td>Focusing illusion</td><td>Overemphasis on particular elements</td><td>Failure to generate a broad range of ideas</td></tr><tr><td>Hot/cold gap</td><td>Current state colors assessment of future state</td><td>Undervaluing or overvaluing ideas</td></tr><tr><td>Say/do gap</td><td>Inability to accurately describe own preferences</td><td>Inability to accurately articulate and assess future wants and needs</td></tr><tr><td>Planning fallacy</td><td>Overoptimism</td><td>Overcommitment to inferior ideas</td></tr><tr><td>Hypothesis confirmation bias</td><td>Look for confirmation of hypothesis</td><td>Disconfirming data missed</td></tr><tr><td>Endowment effect</td><td>Attachment to first solutions</td><td>Reduction in options considered</td></tr><tr><td>Availability bias</td><td>Preference for what can be easily imagined</td><td>Undervaluing of more novel ideas</td></tr></table>

Because my aim in this essay is to accelerate the scholarly conversation around research possibilities, I offer here a path that design thinking itself would advocate: pick a place to start that looks promising and go deep to see what you find. My “solution” (incomplete and somewhat arbitrary as I acknowledge it to be) is to look for opportunities to relate design thinking to clearly identified problems in a field with a deep empirical literature base.

My initial explorations suggest that the literature on cognitive bias offers a good place to start. It provides a well-researched body of work over more than five decades delineating the flaws of human beings as information processors. Many of design thinking’s tools and processes, I will argue, ameliorate some of these human shortcomings. By grounding the practice of design thinking in the literature on humans as cognitive processors and their limitations, my aim is to use the theoretical relationships uncovered to lay the groundwork for the development of a set of propositions for further testing.

## Examining the Psychological Underpinning of Design Thinking in Relationship to the Cognitive Bias Literature

In reviewing the cognitive biases literature through the lens of design-thinking practices, I have identified nine prominent and well-documented cognitive biases worth exploring more deeply: the projection bias, the egocentric empathy gap, the hot/cold gap, the focusing illusion, the say/do gap, the planning fallacy, the hypothesis confirmation bias, the endowment effect, and the availability bias. In the next section, I briefly review each of these and describe their negative consequences for decisionmaking when innovation is the goal. Table 3 summarizes these:

1. Projection Bias: A “projection bias” is evidenced in a tendency to project the present into the future (Loewenstein and Angner, 2003). Such “naive realism” results in predictions that are too regressive and too biased toward the present. Gilbert, Gill, and Wilson (2002) describe a similar behavior that they term presentism, which they define as a “tendency to over-estimate the extent to which their future experience of an event will resemble their current experience of an event.” This projection of a decision-maker’s past into attempts to imagine a new future impedes the development of novel ideas as well as accurate assessment of their likelihood of success.

2. Egocentric Empathy Gap: Other researchers (Van Boven, Dunning, and Loewenstein, 2000) document what they call an “egocentric empathy gap,” which causes decision-makers to consistently overestimate the similarity between what they value and what others value. In fact, Van Boven and Loewenstein (2003) argue that “a venerable tradition in social psychology has documented people’s tendency to project their own thoughts, preferences, and behaviors onto other people.” In the literature on motivated information processing, Nickerson (1998) has noted the “pervasive human tendency to selectively perceive, encode, and retain information that is congruent with one’s desires” and linked it with both problematic idea generation and testing. This results in the creation of new ideas that the creators find valuable, but that those they seek to serve do not, and also makes assessment of the likelihood of success problematic.

3. Hot/Cold Gap: Decision-makers’ state at the time of the prediction, whether emotion-laden (hot) or not (cold), unduly influences their assessment of the potential value of an idea, leading them to either under- or overvalue ideas (Loewenstein and Angner, 2003). For example, decision-makers’ current enthusiasm over an idea can impede the accuracy of their prediction of how others will react (or even how they themselves will react) in the future when their state is likely to be less “hot.”

4. Focusing Illusion: Another dysfunction that Loewenstein and Angner (2003) describe is a “focusing illusion,” in which decision-makers tend to overestimate the effect of one factor at the expense of others, overreacting to specific stimuli, and ignoring others. This can impact either hypothesis generation or testing, and results in a narrowed, and potentially less attractive, set of ideas.

5. Say/Do Gap: Innovators have long sought to compensate for these prediction problems by asking users what they want. Unfortunately, this, too, has proven to be problematic in a phenomenon that some call the “say/do” gap. Consumers are frequently unable to accurately describe their own current behavior, much less make reliable predictions (Fellmann, 1999). Morwitz, Steckel, and Gupta (1997) perform a metaanalysis of over 100 studies and conclude that consumers were not reliable predictors of their own purchase behavior for any type of goods studied. Even focus groups, the gold standard in marketing research for decades, have a high error rate and routinely fail to perform satisfactorily.

6. The Planning Fallacy: Even when decisionmakers succeed at creating new ideas, they are overly optimistic about how well-received these ideas will be because of what Kahneman and Tversky (1979) term the “planning fallacy.” This tendency toward a rosy view of the future is well documented. In multiple studies, people routinely describe their pasts as balanced and consisting of both positive and negative events, yet predict their futures as consisting of overwhelmingly positive events (Armor and Taylor, 1998). These views only rarely include considerations of failures, except in the cases of clinically depressed subjects (Newby-Clark and Ross, 2003). This same overconfidence and unfounded optimism has been found to extend to organizational planning processes (Larwood and Whittaker, 1977).

7. Hypothesis Confirmation Bias: In the well-recognized “hypothesis confirmation bias” (Snyder and Swan, 1978), decision-makers seek explanations that coincide with their preferred alternative. They search for facts, as Gilbert (2006) notes, which allow them to build faith in favored solutions, whereas they must be compelled by data to believe that which points to a less favored one. Similarly, Ditto and Lopez (1992) demonstrate that decision-makers use different levels of intensity in processing information consistent with their preferences versus that which contradicts their preconceived perceptions. Information challenging any perception is more likely to be heavily scrutinized than information agreeing with the preferred solution, and alternative explanations that allow decisionmakers to ignore this disconfirming data are often pursued. They summarize: “People are less critical consumers of preference-consistent than preferenceinconsistent information.” Even when decisionmakers’ bias is revealed to them, they often fail to correct it, as Gilbert and Jones (1986) conclude after a series of experiments: “We do indeed subscribe to the social realities we construct, even when we are well aware that we have constructed them.”

8. The Endowment Effect: In a similar vein, Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1991) identify an “endowment effect” in which decision-makers’ attachment to what they already have causes a loss aversion that makes giving something up (e.g., the solution in hand) more painful than the pleasure of getting something new, in this case a new and improved solution (Kahneman, 2011).

9. The Availability Bias: Kahneman and Tversky (1979) also identify an “availability bias” in which decisionmakers undervalue options that are harder for them to imagine. Because the familiarity of an idea is likely to be inversely related to its novelty, this leads to a preference for more incremental solutions.

Thus, would-be innovators seeking to produce and assess more novel, value-creating, and differentiated ideas face significant challenges from different sources of cognitive bias.
