> 来源：The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Idea of Design

A Design Issues Reader

edited by

Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan

The contents of this book were first published in Design Issues (ISSN 0747- 9360), a publication of The MIT Press. Except as otherwise noted, copyright in each article is owned by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Richard Buchanan, "Wicked Problems in Design Thinking," vol. 8, no. 2, (Spring 1992): 5-21; Yves Deforge, "Avatars of Design: Design Before Design," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 4350; Alain Findeli, "Moholy-Nagy's Design Pedagogy in Chicago (1937-1946)," vol. 7, no. 1, (Fall 1990): 4-19; Jorge Frascara, "Graphic Design: Fine Art or Social Science?", vol. 5, no. 1, (Fall 1988): 1829; Victor Papanek, "The Future Isn't What It Used To Be," vol. 5, no. 1, (Fall 1988): 4-17; Rudolph Arnheim, "Sketching and the Psychology of Design," vol. 9, no. 2, (Spring 1993): 1519; Richard Buchanan, "Myth and Maturity: Toward a New Örder in the Decade of Design," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 7080; Martin Krampen, "Semiotics in Architecture and Industrial/Product Design," vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1989): 124-140; Ann Tyler, "Shaping Belief: The Role of Audience in Visual Communication," vol. 9, no. 1, (Fall 1992): 21-29; Martin Solomon, "The Power of Punctuation," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 2832; Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, "Design and Order in Everyday Life," vol. 8, no. 1, (Fall 1991): 26-34; S. Balaram, "Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian Mythology," vol. 5, ., (Spring 1989: 68-85; Clive Dilnot, "The Gift," vol. , no., (Spring 1993): 51-63; Klaus Krippendorff, "On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts or On the Proposition that 'Design Is Making Sense (of Things),'" vol. 5, no. 2, (Spring 1989): 938; Rajeswari Ghose, "Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia," vol. 6, no. 1, (Fall 1989): 31-48; Tony Fry, "A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality," vol. 6, no. 1, (Fall 1989: 15-30; Takuo Hirano, "The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 54-62; A. Cheng, "Line," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 5-16; Gert Selle, "Untimely Opinions (An Attempt to Reflect on Design)," vol. 6, no. 2, (Spring 1990): 33-42; Tomas Maldonado, "The Idea of Comfort," vol. 8, no. 1, (Fall 1991): 35-43; Barbara Usherwood, "The Design Museum: Form Follows Funding," vol. 7, no. 2, (Spring 1991): 76-87; Abraham Moles, "Design and Immateriality: What of It in a Post Industrial Society?" vol. 4, no. 1-2, (Special Issue 1988): 25-32; Victor Margolin, "Expanding the Boundaries of Design: The Product Environment and the New User," vol. 4, no. 1-2, (Special Issue): 5964.

## Second printing, 1996

Selecion an introduction; copyright195 by he asscuset Instue of Technology.

Ao by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, o rig oThe T .Fooion, plea  Te T ss Journas Departent, 5 Hayward Street, Cambridge, Mass.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data   
The idea of design/edited by Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan p. cm.-(A Design issues reader) ISBN 0-262-63166-0alk.pape   
0.1 Design. I. Margolin, Victor. II. Buchanan, Richard.   
NK1525.134 1995   
745.4-dc209 5-24675 5-2467   
To our families   
Sylvia and Myra   
and   
Barbara, Stephanie and Rick

## Contents

ixi Acknowledgments xi Introduction

Section I   
Reflecting on Design   
Richard Buchanan   
3 Wicked Problems in Design Thinking   
Yves Deforge   
21 Avatars f Design: Design Before Design   
Alain Findeli   
29 Moholy-Nagy's Design Pedagogy in Chicago (19371946)   
Jorge Frascara   
44 Graphic Design: Fine Art or Social Science?   
Victor Papanek   
56 The Future Isn't What It Used To Be   
Rudolf Arnheim   
70 Sketching and the Psychology of Design   
Richard Buchanan   
75 Myth and Maturity: Toward a New Order in the Decade of Design   
Section II   
The Meaning of Products   
Martin Krampen   
89 Semiotics in Architecture and Industrial/Product Design   
Ann C. Tyler   
104 Shaping Belief: The Role of Audience in Visual Communication   
Martin Solomon   
113 The Power of Punctuation   
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi   
118 Design and Order in Everyday Life   
S. Balaram   
127 Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian   
Mythology   
Clive Dilnot   
144 The Gift

## Klaus Krippendorff

On the Essential Contexts of Artifacts or on the Proposition that Design Is Making Sense (of Things)

## Section III

## Design and Culture Design and Culture

Rajeshwari Ghose 187 Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia Tony Fry 204 A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality Takuo Hirano 221 The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account A Cheng 227 Line Gert Selle 238 Untimely Opinions (An Attempt to Reflect on Design) Tomás Maldonado 248 The Idea of Comfort Barbara Usherwood 257 The Design Museum: Form Follows Funding Abraham A. Moles 268 Deand Immateriality:What  It i  ost Industrial Socy? Victor Margolin 275 Expanding the Boundaries of Design: The Product Environment and the New User 281 Sources 283 About the Contributors

## Acknowledgments

We are indebted to the following individuals who have contributed their editorial skills, insights, time, and passion to Design Issues during the period of publication from which the essays in this anthology were drawn: Leon Bellin, Stephen Bloom, Marco Diani, Dennis Doordan, John Heskett, Martin Hurtig, and Lawrence Salomon. We also acknowledge others for their efforts on behalf of the journal during the same period: John Cullars, Bonnie Osborne, and Faith Van Alten. In addition we would like to thank Karen Moyer for her design assistance. The School of Art and Design at the University of Illinois at Chicago (under the directorship of Martin Hurtig, then Susan Sensemann, and finally Judith Kirshner) served as the original home for Design Issues and sustained the journal for its first nine volumes (19841993). Design Issues is now edited at the Department of Design at Carnegie Mellon University and published by The MIT Press.

# Introduction

The esays collectedin thisanthology repreent an mportanthit of focus in how the idea of design is explored in contemporary discourse. For earlier writers like Adolf Loos, Walter Gropius, and EK, Jr thetltt. Loos critiqued the presence of excessive ornament as a distraction from the experience of formal qualities, while Gropius, in his Bauhaus manifesto of 1919, proclaimed the cathedral as the emblematic object that would embody the spiritual values of the age. Properly conceived, the object was an instrument for improving social life and bringing order, reason, and expressive vitality to everyday experience. It carried enormous symbolic weight, and battles were fought over the proper form of the object as an expression of personal vision, aesthetic sensibility, and cultural values. In later years, the "good design" debate revolved around issues of how the form of objects could enhance the quality of life. Rationalist design discourse of the 1950s and 1960s promulgated a spare formal order as a design ideal, whether manifested in Swiss typography or in unobtrusive products like the Braun stereo sound system. Even reactions against those formal restrictions by Pop designers in the 1960s or Memphis designers and new-wave typographers in the 1980s nonetheless emphasized the objects themselves rather than the complex thought processes that led to them or the situations in which they were used and given meaning.

The emphasis is reversed in design discourse of the 1980s and 1990s. Objects remain important as a symbolic location of experience, but writers increasingly focus attention on the psychological, social, and cultural contexts that give meaning and value to products and to the discipline of design practice. This shift is not based on the suspiciously tidy and ideologically convenient division between modernism and postmodernism that some writers proposed in the early 1980s. Rather, it is guided by the recognition that objects are situated in a variety of ways that were not clearly understood or adequately explored by the designers, historians, critics, and theorists who established the precedents for the field of design earlier in this century. As a consequence, contemporary design discourse does not represent a radical break with the past. Instead, it represents a broadening of the scope of design to include issues and problems that were often embedded in earlier practice and speculation but were seldom developed in depth.

The essays assembled here are primarily examples of design criticism and theory, with occasional ventures into philosophical issues that bear on the understanding of design. However, it is important to place this work in its proper relationship with design

history because historical materials are included from time to time in many of the essays. Where history seeks to reproduce and interpret concrete events as they actually occurred—recognizing that events and actually occurred are highly ambiguous terms whose meanings are essentially contested in design history—criticism and theory seek to explain, on the basis of the study of many instances of design in a variety of circumstances, the nature of design processes, practices, and products. Philosophic speculation, to the degree that it occurs in these essays, serves to anchor criticism and theory in the further investigation of general principles of human experience. Such reflection, whether it is critical, theoretical, or philosophic, sometimes emerges from the personal experience of historical events or from the consideration of historical materials, but the direction of investigation is toward the understanding of contemporary problems and toward ideas that will affect future practice and the general understanding of design. However, this book is not an effort to establish a monistic vision of design. It is not based on a single unifying concept of design or on the prospect of a single philosophy of design. Rather, it is based on a belief in the value of radical systematic pluralism: the principled cultivation of a sustained conversation among individuals with widely differing perspectives on the natural and humanmade world. Pluralism keeps alive the ongoing search for truth and understanding by focusing inquiry on common problems encountered in experience—in this case, the experience of the humanmade—rather than on the technical refinement, fine points, and sylisti polish oa single theory. Pluralism sustains the ecolo culture, maintaining a gene pool of diverse ideas and methods that enables us to avoid entrapment in dogma by forcing our attention to features of the world that might otherwise be ignored by doctrines that are conceived too narrowly—as it seems all doctrines eventually prove to be. Despite the enthusiasm with which it has been embraced by theorists of the postmodern, radical pluralism is not an invention belonging to the late twentieth century. The concept of systematic pluralism that lies behind this book has its precedent in the works of John Dewey, Scott Buchanans Possibility (published in27), a the works of the two greatest American rhetoricians of the twentieth century, Kenneth Burke and Richard McKeon. These individuas recognized that erinitic creen"mediateour experic the wor  a he lui  pol i seon Design is an area of both semantic problems and significant inqiry. The semanic problems come from the range ofntellectual and practical perspectives on the human-made world that have helped to shape design thinking in the twentieth century. From its beginning, design discourse has reflected a wide variety of ideas

and methods and a broad diversity of philosophical assumptions, and it has been difficult for readers to disentangle the various perspectives from the substantive problems that writers sought to address. This has contributed to ideological disputes among the schools of design and has slowed the development of design studies as a meeting ground for significant inquiry. However, as the semantic differences among participants become more familiar, there is a new possibility for productive conversation. The purpose of this anthology is to move design discourse toward the discussion of common themes, rather than merely sustain ideological differences. Ideological differences will take care of themselves. The challenge is to show how discussion may become more productive by learning what different perspectives have to offer to the community of inquirers as new insights into design.

Accordingly, the essays in this volume are organized in three sections, each representing an important area of new inquiry that expands the scope of design thinking. There are many connections and interdependencies among these sections, but each section develops its own set of themes and offers a distinctive orientation toward the complexity of design in the contemporary world. Essays in the first section address the culture of design. They are investigations of designers and the arts and disciplines of design thinking and design practice. Essays in the second section address the meaning of products, with special emphasis on how meaning is socially constructed through interactions between users and the humanmade world. Finally, essays in the third section address the broad relations between design and culture, placing design and Eurocentric visions of design in the context of world culture.

## Reflecting on Design

Among the many themes explored in this section, three stand out as particularly significant for revealing the trend of contemporary design discourse. The first theme is the nature of the discipline of design and its relationships with other disciplines and bodies of knowledge. The second theme is the connection between contemporary reflection and historically situated ideas and practices of design. The third theme is the direction of new practices and lines of research in the conception, planning, and presentation of design ideas.

In the first essay, Richard Buchanan explores the discipline of design as a new form of rhetoric suited to an age of technology. He argues that design is a liberal art of technological culture, concerned with the conception and planning of all of the instances of the artificial or human-made world: signs and images, physical objects, activities and services, and systems or environments. The conception or invention of new design ideas is explained through the "doctrine of placements," while the planning of products requires the integration of knowledge from many fields and disciplines, directed toward the

solution of wicked problems of indeterminacy. He argues that the three great expressions of design thinking in the twentieth century— engineering, marketing, and the forms of graphic and industrial design—are distinguished by the modality or qualification of their arguments: Engineers argue from necessity, marketing experts argue from contingency, and graphic and industrial designers argue from a vision of possibility. Contemporary approaches to design increasingly recognize the interdependence of these modalities of argument in the development of successful products. Similarly, Yves Deforge seeks to establish a new humanistic approach to design. He also argues that designers are concerned with conceiving and realizing ideas in products. However, Deforge begins by studying the avatars of design—early engineers—in order to distinguish the utilitarian and sign functions that he believes all designers must explore in the creation of material products. He argues that ll of the technical capacities of the engineer-designer must "dissolve" into a single technical capacity. This capacity, Deforge observes, unfortunately tends to be reductive, threatening the new breed of designers with a loss of the former strength and originality of design: a vision of the world, based on the ascendancy of humanity over nature. Deforge's hope is that consumers may become more involved in the conception of products so that a new possibility may emerge: the engineer-designer-consumer. While Deforge begins with the avatars of design and Buchanan anchors his inquiry in the cultural and philosophical u, Alain Findeli turns to Moholy-Nagy and the New Bauhaus in Chicago between 1937 and 1946. He examines design education and the changing pattern of supporting studies, tracing Moholy-Nagy's effort trouc eneral uation and cinc ntothec lum in order to encourage individuality and social responsibility anghs sdentsAlthough this proc was ut short fcal difficultie anhentiely atMoholy-Nagy, Findelgus prepare designers for the increasing complexity of their work, particularly wit regard osthticnthcls. Some of the new problems of aesthetics, ethics, and human values are discussed by Jorge Frascara and Victor Papanek. Both authors point toward the need for the discipline of design to find wncoporatinhpracticl nseuenc  kowle o  i emphasisonesthetics hasdistracte graphicdesigers from - ing a clearer understanding communicationandsocal sc ualrtnt cor g he ualiy work. He urgdesiners cnsider the peranc thei wor it eizi

life. Graphic design should be based, he argues, on the study of human communication. This would shift "the designer's center of attention from the interrelation of visual components to that between the audience and the design, recognizing the receiver as an active participant in the construction of meaning." Turning from graphic to industrial design, Papanek identifies a problem that appears to be symmetrical to that raised by Frascara. Instead of excessive emphasis on aesthetics, Papanek observes excessive emphasis on "high-tech functionalism that disregards human psychic needs at the expense of clarity." His essay attempts to demonstrate the vast amount of new and useful information that is now available in the social sciences but is often ignored or neglected by designers—and, implicitly, ignored in design education.

Although design thinking in the contemporary world must be based on knowledge gained from many fields and disciplines, the core of design thinking remains the ability to conceive, plan, and present ideas about products. Knowledge may be a source of inspiration, practical constraint, or criteria for evaluation, but knowledge is useless unless it is transformed in the designer's imagination into ideas and images, visions of the world that may be effectively communicated to others. This is the subject of Rudolf Arnheim's essay on sketching and the psychology of design. Taking as his point of departure the idea of sketching as a kind of dialectic, an idea proposed by architect Gabriela Goldschmidt, Arnheim discusses the relation between mental images and visual representation in the design process. He implicitly argues that the nature and functions of sketching in design deserve much more attention than they have received in the past—despite numerous "how to" books—and that sketching is a design tool of remarkable flexibility that individuals trained in the logocentrism of Western culture have failed to examine in proper depth. In effect, Arnheim reminds us that the new discipline of design, although it requires sophisticated knowledge and communicative ability, can never be based on words alone: Design is a discipline of vision, both literally and metaphorically.

Efforts to shape a new discipline of design and better prepare designers to work effectively in contemporary circumstances are signs of the changing culture of design. As Jorge Frascara points out, design has evolved into sophisticated practice in a piecemeal fashion, without the benefit of much theoretical speculation. This issue is addressed in more detail in the final essay of this section: a discussion by Richard Buchanan of the problems raised (and the problems ignored) at one recent international design conference. In this essay, Buchanan focuses attention on the nature and value of design studies as a complement to traditional design education and to new forms of design practice. He provides a framework for how diverse kinds of knowledge can be brought into design thinking in support of the development of a new discipline of design.

## The Meaning of Products

Although the first section emphasizes the designer and the discipline of design thinking, the following section focuses the experience of the human beings who use products. Despite the best efforts of designers to determine the precise nature of products in order to effect their "designs upon the world," the career of products in human experience depends as much on the ability of human beings to make sense of the artificial world as it does on the intentions of the designer. The meaning of products is constructed through personal interactions that are not entirely within the control of designers.

Two themes in this section indicate the direction of contemporary investigations of the meaning of products. The first theme is interaction itself. It is expressed in the idea that human beings are not passive recipients of product messages, but rather are active participants in shaping meaning. The second theme is that the construction of meaning, although subject to the contingencies and vagaries of personal interest and attention, is disciplined and systematic, not random. This is expressed in the idea that although human users may not be conscious of the art of reading and interpreting the products around them, a variety of arts or disciplines do exist and may be articulated clearly by critics and others who explore how products gain meaning in one's personal and social life. Once again, pluralism is the hallmark of contemporary discourse in this area of investigation. The writers explore semiotics, grammar, rhetoric, logic, and dialectic, as well as social psychology, phenomenology, and product semantics, in an effort to understand the meaning of products.

In the first essay of this section, Martin Krampen introduces the concept of ecological semiotics in order to focus on the reciprocal relationships between humans and their built environment. He proposes the term affordance, coined by James J. Gibson in The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, as the appropriate ecological equivalent of meaning, relating the different scales of architectural and industrial design through physiognomic qualities. What follows is a study of the physical and social affordances provided by products of different scales, with subtle implications for how the concept of affordance may be extended into the study of graphical user interfaces.

In the next essay, Martin Solomon continues the theme of grammatical analysis begun by Krampen, but without direct reference to the concept of affordance. He demonstrates how the designer's attention to the subtle qualities of punctuation in typography may guide a reader through the dynamics of the reading process, not only affecting typographic clarity, but supporting the entire feeling of a visual design. On first reading, Solomon's essay may appear to be a return to formalist considerations—the interaction of visual components in typography—but this would be a misreading of his intent. Solomon is making the passage from a formalist design aesthetic to the problems of rhetorical engagement with readers; the resources of grammar and punctuation serve communicative goals that, by extension, may reach to the new "reader-based" communication theory.

Graphic designer Ann Tyler takes a different approach to the problem of meaning. She turns explicitly to rhetoric in order to explore the delicate dynamic negotiation that takes place between the designer and his or her audience in effective visual communication. Instead of developing an art of interpretation like Krampen's ecological semiotics, Tyler focuses on an art of persuasion directed toward the different communicative ends of moving an audience to action, teaching, and exhibiting values. Like Frascara, Tyler tries to move the discussion of graphic design beyond formalism to a consideration of social significance. Her approach focuses on the arguments of visual communication, with formal devices (such as those discussed by Solomon or by writers who have taken from rhetoric merely the figures of speech) placed in the context of interactive argumentation.

Krampen, Solomon, and Tyler view interaction with users and audiences from the perspective of the designer—with the user as a kind of "implied audience" in the designer's method. In contrast, the prominent social psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, author of Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, turns directly to ordinary people to assess the meaning of art and design in their lives. This is a provocative project; it initially appears to demolish the pretensions of designers—particularly some of the modernists—who believe that they can impose order on otherwise chaotic environments. However, in the course of extensive interviews with "normal" people, Csikszentmihalyi discovers a subtle connection between the high arts and kitsch. Specifically, he explains how objects are assimilated into personal, private lives and are given symbolic meaning as expressions of the order of private experiences. Objects take on symbolic value with reference to one's personal history: "The meaning of our private lives is built with these household objects." Yet he suggests further that public art and design perform an analogous function for society as a whole: "The high arts help create order in the thoughts and feelings a given society has about itself." The artist and designer are able "to condense, in a given moment of historical time, the expressive striving of a great number of people."

S. Balaram builds on the theme of product symbolism and rhetoric by shifting our attention to Indian culture. He discusses the importance of rhetoric in Indian life for the creation and transmission of mythologies, with particular reference to Gandhi and Krishna. Then, in a very persuasive argument, he demonstrates how successful artifacts symbolically mediate between the stable mythological heritage of a culture and the fast-changing socioeconomic contexts of their use. He argues that the semantic meaning of products can both support and interpret the powerful mythologies of a rich culture such as that of India. This essay presents one of the most effective renderings of the relatively recent concept of product semantics, which was developed by Reinhart Butter and Klaus Krippendorff. As Balaram shows, product semantics is neither new nor dependent on the concepts of semiotics developed in the West. It is an element in the broader current of rhetorical thinking that links western and eastern cultures.

This theme is continued in the next essay, but in place of the art of rhetoric we see the art of dialectic as it is employed in contemporary phenomenology. In contrast to rhetoric, which reveals our motives and the designs we make on others, dialectic points toward the design or pattern of relationships, the harmonies and disharmonies, that we discover in the world. Gift giving is both a private and a public act. It is the focus of a set of mysterious dialectical issues that are probed by Clive Dilnot, who explores the phenomenological dimensions of the gift in human culture. What makes this essay a useful contribution to understanding the meaning of products are the paradoxes surrounding the act and the object. Is the gift the act of giving or is it the object given, and if it is the object given, then surely the object has more meaning in the context of a human relationship than a designer can begin to imagine. Dilnot's focus on the meaning of a gift implies many questions about the meaning of any product in the context of social processes. Indeed, Dilnot suggests that the act of giving could become the chief analogy for defining the character of all of the things that we make.

In the final essay of this section, Klaus Krippendorff returns to an emphasis on the designer as the maker of meaning. In this case, he seems to assume, as many designers do, that designers are surrogates for the user: The way a designer makes meaning is the way a user will reconstruct meaning. However, it is precisely this assumption that Krippendorff seeks to address. "No one can presume that form (the designer's objectified meaning) and (the user's) meaning are the same; hence, the need for product semantics to study how they relate." He explains the concept of product semantics and its relation to traditional semiotics, with emphasis on analytic and cognitive models of communication represented in a variety of schematic diagrams. The goal is to provide a corrective to thoughtless self-expression in design that fails to properly engage human users by ignoring how they make meaning through products. Designers are part of a broad ecological process, but their success depends upon their ability to understand "the hidden governance of collectively shared archetypes and mythologies whose meanings must be respected, grasped, tapped, and drifted with." This essay is one of the original, and probably the best, expositions of product semantics of the 1980s.

The meaning of products—what it is, how it is constructed, and under what principles—was often neglected as a problem in earlier design discourse. The essays in this section do not bring closure to this new effort. Rather, they open up possibilities for

further investigation in a variety of directions. Both designers and the general public can gain from a better understanding of what, how, and why products mean.

## Design and Culture

The essays in the final section address the culture in which designers and communities of users function. Because the traditions of anthropology and cultural theory have paid insufficient attention to design as a cultural practice, its effects on individuals and the world at large have been little understood. Yet we do not live without products, and we shape our lives with the products that are available to us. Design thus operates culturally in a number of significant ways. First, products embody notions of identity that are socially recognized and thus become tokens in the symbolic exchange of meaning. Second, products become instruments for individual and collective action that ranges from the provision of essential needs to hobbies and pastimes. Third, products as tokens of economic exchange are central to the formation of global trade patterns and the accumulation of capital. Design policies are therefore integral to debates about national economic and social development, just as design philosophies and values on an individual and group level shape our reflections on how we might live.

Design as an element of planning policy and a means to reflect on the quality of life are both themes that are taken up in the essays included in this section. A new element in design discourse is the emergence of voices from cultures from which little was previously heard, particularly in Asia and Latin America. This has been prompted in part by the awareness of tensions that have arisen since the end of World War II from attempts to impose ideologies of western industrial progress on developing nations. Rajeshwari Ghose addresses this problem in her essay when she discusses the struggle to define a strategy of design that is appropriate to the conditions of life in India. Currently, she says, the "discourses on design are so overpowered by dominant first world methodologies that we must wait quite a while for new approaches to evolve and be cogently articulated." Ghose recognizes that many Asians hope to modernize their countries through paradigms of design that arrive from the first world. However, she sees the main task of the Asian designer as bringing some semblance of order into a fragmented environment in which continuities of traditional practices and methods coexist with the discontinuities of innovation. As Ghose makes clear, this can create a schizophrenic situation whereby Asian designers espouse the virtues of intermediate technology at international conferences while satisfying the demand for high-priced luxury goods from the affluent upper classes at home.

In her assessment of the issues that are central to the development of new design practices in Asia, Ghose employs a centerperiphery model in which the center is occupied by developed first

world nations that export the rationality of modernization to those on the periphery. Tony Fry also uses this model to characterize the difficulties of writing a design history of Australia, a country that has traditionally been perceived as marginal to design practice. Although Australia is not considered a developing country in an economic sense, Fry recounts an aspect of its history that illustrates comparable behavior in cultural terms. He points out in his case study of the Ford assembly plant in Geelong, Victoria, that Australians drew their own sense of design from an American model. Fry relates the dominance of American technology in Australia to Australia's exclusion from the master narratives of design history. He uses the example of the Ford plant to espouse a politics of marginality that must be engaged to redress the imbalances that he finds prevalent in design history. Takuo Hirano's experience as one of Japan's first industrial designers provides a different scenario of engagement with western design and technology than Fry describes in Australia. Rather than succumb to a foreign influence, the Japanese used the techniques of American designers and manufacturers to build their own economy. In a period of forty years Japan went from "a country in which there were no designers, much less design education, to one where currently there are large numbers of designers and myriad design education opportunities." Initially trained as a craftsman, Hirano became a leader in this transformation. He chronicles the government'sshift away from sending students abroad to building up its own system of design education. Unlike the Australian experience with Ford, Japan's encounter with Western design and technology led to a strong national production system in which design plays a central part. In contrast to Hirano's emphasis on design as an instrument of modernization, A Cheng conveys the depth and richness of line as a traditional design principle in Chinese culture, making the point that line is an essential part of Chinese identity. He shows how wipred  sniffntrrtitctice nition of this depth and the pervasiveness a common principlein and how much might be lost when design principles and methods are adapted from one culture to another. Gert Sel o  he hebilit  G culture hat he caims or he raditnal Chine rts, oi for large numbers of people. He argues that most people derive their understanding of design from discount furniture chains and ioro the striving  produce uthentic bjects. Making a Manin distncion btwenuthentniuthentiproducts, hevors ikeMarBe vi cacula ihhic te

user can establish a full sensual and emotional relation. The alternative, he ys i a pt.

As Tomás Maldonado argues, objects not only shape feelings of identity, they also regulate human behavior. He focuses on comfort, which he finds to be a value that is far from innocuous. Along with privacy and hygiene, he claims, comfort is a control mhat henl lizidaily lencapitalist society.Objects bece paren ments, such as domestic interiors, and these environments contribute to the construction of human consciousness and values. The modern kitchen, designed on the basis of an industrial model, became a site of production rather than a place to socialize. Likewise the bathroom reinforced notions of privacy and a different relation to one's body. Maldonado exposes a hidden politics of material culture that links objects of daily life to regimes of social order and control.

The theme of control is also evident in Barbara Usherwood's critique of London's Design Museum, which was written shortly after the museum opened in July 1989. Just as Maldonado finds political meaning in the design of the domestic interior, Usherwood claims an underlying ideological message in the seemingly neutral displays of the Design Museum. The intent of the museum, she argues, is to promote a better educated consumer, but she also points out the connection between the kinds of goods sold by Sir Terence Conran, the museum's principal donor, and those on display in the exhibits. She sees no signs of pluralism in the museum's exhibition philosophy, particularly in its Study Collection, nor does she find any sense of history's contingency in the descriptive labeling of the objects.

The Design Museum, however, is anchored in material culture which some cultural theorists believe is becoming marginal as we move into a period in which increasing attention is being paid to immateriality as manifested in such forms as virtual reality and the Internet. Sociologist Abraham Moles counters this claim by noting that "the seductive immateriality of today's world" rests firmly on a foundation of material support whose reliability and stability the designer must maintain. Moles refuses to identify the designers of immaterial culture as a new avant-garde by emphasizing that immaterial experiences, with their illusion of perfection, are only possible because of material equipment that is vulnerable to malfunction and deterioration.

The social organization of product maintenance, which was an ongoing theme of Moles's work, is also central to Victor Margolin's essay. Margolin expands the subject matter of design to include all of the elements that are required for a product to remain operative. He suggests that designers locate individual objects within a larger "product environment" that must also be designed. This environment includes the instruction manuals, help lines, replacement parts, and repair services that are necessary to sustain a working relationship with a complex product like a computer or an automobile.

When elements of the product environment are not available to support the product, the product itself suffers.

## Conclusion

The authors in this anthology include designers, historians, rhetoricians, architects, psychologists, communications theorists, sociologists, philosophers, and semioticians. What we intend to demonstrate through the remarkable diversity of themes they have addressed is how fruitful the results can be when different perspectives are brought into relation in a spirit of shared concern for common problems. A design discourse based on a commitment to radical pluralism can open up new vistas for thought and enable us to circumvent the cul-de-sacs that arise when reflection becomes too rigid.

Contemporary design problems cut across many traditional specializations and disciplines, yet there is a tendency among some who study design to wish it institutionalized in the same manner as other subjects, following the model of the old learning. There are others, however, who see in design a path to the new learning, a path toward a better integration of theory, practice, and production. Unfortunately, design is often poorly understood and is regarded merely as an area of commercial application—a curiosity, a place of trade activity—instead of being regarded as a resource and a place for interdisciplinary collaboration that can give new life and purpose to the conception and planning of products.

To support this more fruitful regard for design, Design Issues, from which the essays in this anthology have been drawn, has, since its inception in 1984, consistently promoted a new place for thought where scholars and practitioners with different experiences and modes of reflection can share an interest in understanding design in all its ramifications. What some scholars are now calling "design studies" is not an effort to remove speculation on design from the day-to-day problems of design practice. If discussion moves, for a time, away from the design studio, it does so only to return with new ideas and understanding. The essays in this anthology indicate how diverse and productive a pluralistic field of design studies can be. They point toward a new culture of design that is connected in a variety of ways with other specializations of learning. If the essays are any indication, design is more like a site of research than an institutionalized profession, offering fresh opportunities to understand what it means to be human in the contemporary world and, at the same time, bringing theoretical understanding into direct relation wit practice nd rouction. Those whore ble the abundance of new thought that can be brought to bear on common problems will create a new world without ignoring the

Section I

Reflecting on Design
