> 来源：The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia Rajeshwari Ghose

The very idea of writing on contemporary or "modern" design issues pertaining to any country or civilization seems to evolve around two methodological assumptions. The first assumption is that there exists something called design as ontological equipment. I noa abel that deistulee in quite the same way as economics, sociology, or history exist, distinct from the specifics of disciplines such as current monetary policy of the People's Republic of China, analyses of football hooliganism in Britain, or the causes of World War I. This broad rubric then could accommodate architectural, industrial, communications, and fashion/garment design, woven together as it were by a common methodological thread. Constituted thus, it could form the basis of teaching curricula.

The second assumption is that nation states have identifiable cultural, socioeconomic, and esthetic aspirations and predictable patterns of lifestyle, which despite all their variegated heterogeneities, exhibit at least a certain identifiable common cultural substance and provide the necessary tabula rasa on which modern design may be projected.

When these general assumptions are applied to Asian design, new problems emerge. Despite dissensions, the contemporary mainstream concept of design in the West is in some vague manner connected with new sources of energy, technological breakthroughs, mass production, minute specializations, and global quest for markets. It is perceived as a visible tool of both commerce and industry, carrying with it other legacies of nineteenth and early twentieth century ideals, for example, that design could act as a leveler of society through more equitable accessibility to mass-produced goods as well as introduce a sense of clean, rational, impersonal order. This sense of rational order is a direct descendant of the Enlightenment ideology, which in Weberian terms produced the Western brand of capitalistic transformation of society. There were, no doubt, several variants to this historic Western model, but underlying it all were two central principles: The first was that modernization, of which design was but a tool, was endogenous, that society was capable of transforming itself from within, and where there was inadequate endogenous impetus, such as in Germany, the state would become a central agent in the transformation of society. The second principle was that this modernism would be based on rationalism and thus certain kinds of particularist esthetics, value systems, contexts and cultures, religion, and rites and rituals would be universally applicable and all embracing: "from the sofa cushion to urban planning."

At present, most Asians see First World technology and consumerism as handmaidens of design and harbingers of modernity. They hope to implant this combination on their soils and achieve comparable results. Perceived in such a manner, Asian design issues become closely interwoven with issues involving technology/design transfers from the First World, as well as problems associated with adapting new or changing technology to diverse economic, social, cultural, and political conditions. The issues then revolve around the current Third World realities of being "Late Comers" and often lead to self denigration at being slow learners. This, in turn, is then expressed in terms of frustrations at poor quality and high prices, stagnation, particularly in the field of industrial design, and as K. M. Munshi, an industrial designer from India, sums up: "while the rest of the world was changing fast, large Indian Industry remained stagnant. . . . Product innovation was a far cry. Lack of quality bothered neither the buyer nor the seller."2 This situation was exacerbated by "protection," captive markets, import substitution, and a whole range of developmental policies. Munshi continues that it was only in the mid-1960s that "design was recognized as one of the factors which could help exports." Seenfoh inheult history and discussing Asian design issues become obvious. How does one separate it from technology/design transfers, foreign aid, foreign trade and investment, International Patents Acts, government policies of import substitutions and export orientations, from, aboveal the whole idea  development?Is therean Asian eg history at all apart from the histories of all these with a few case studies of either successful or unsuccessful adaptations of First World design? How else does one write design history, how else does one approach design? Surely, to quote the following expression often heard in countries of Asia: "Design is an ancient activity even though a modern profession." What then is the link between the activity and the profession? The quintessence of contemporary design issues in Asia lies in the asking of these questions, in the provoking of new debates. Discourses on design are so overpowered by dominant First World methodologies that we must wait quiteawhileornewpaches tovolveand be cgently lated. Until then, Asian design issues will find mention under a mall sectn eellingl title Desn India, for example, a number of very successful adaptations have a allylvative designs like an oxygenerator and solar rice cooker are still waiting to find local sponsors.

However, extreme caution must be taken in the use of such a blanet r sesg, r As is One," wa amyth that

Recently, the term has been changed into NIE, Newly Industrialized Economies, to accommodate Hong Kong, which will in 1997 be a part of the People's Republic of China. The "Four Dragons" are South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Singapore. Japan was often referred to as the Big Dragon, but recently, the term has been associated with China more to indicate its huge potential. Peter Burger is believed to have been the first to use the term "vulgar Confucianism" to signify Confucianism and its value system, when operating under a free-market economy. It refers to values such as obedience, hierarchy, thrift, hard work, This-worldism, group mentality, and so forth, as the kind of qualities that made the Sinic brand of capitalism possible.

very little credibility even at the time it was being propounded and that died soon after Japan's defeat in World War II. Japan, with its elevated status as a First World power, and the "Four Little Dragons," with their newest apellation as the newly industrialized countries of Asia or the NICs for short operate under different paradigms and constraints and are heirs to different historical legacies from the larger countries of South and Southeast Asia. In the early phases of the colonial era, Orientalists usually divided this huge continent into two vast cultural belts: Indic and Sinic, with a vague understanding that all the land in between was Indo-China. Economists now speak in a neo-Weberian manner of the common heritage of "secular" or "vulgar" Confucianism, which has contributed to a Sinic brand of capitalism. Until recently, China was excluded from this vast and eminently successful belt composed of Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Singapore. It is, however, in the opinion of some economists, at the point of being admitted as the big dragon into this comity of nations with the recent adoption of market socialism. Most developing countries of Asia have begun to perceive design in the contemporary First World model as an agent of capturing markets in an increasingly competitive world. Hence, product differentiation is the buzz word.

Two statements in the official Japanese publication Japan Focus (January 1989) summarize this approach. The first: "Today the technological level of manufactures has become standardized. . . . Thus, in order to provide products with individuality, the trend toward placing importance on design is strengthening more than ever before." The second: "The trend toward utilization of foreign designers by Japanese makers has become increasingly active since the end of the 1970s. To foreign designers, perhaps the short life cycle of Japanese products (italics added) compared to those of the West, with even such items as cars undergoing frequent model changes, makes the Japanese market particularly attractive."

This article lays no claim to address the complexities of the macro Asian design scene, but will limit itself to just a few of the crucial issues in the lesser developed countries (LDCs) of Asia, particularly those issues pertaining to India.

In the 1960s in India, a few men of vision set up a modern design education center based on broad humanistic principles. The designer Charles Eames, one of the founders of the National Institute of Design in Ahmedabad, India, hoped that it be "concerned with quality and the ultimate values of the human environment."

The Ahmedabad Declaration on Industrial Design for Development, promulgated in January 1979, stated in clear terms the role of design in a developing society. It called for (1) understanding the values of one's society and then defining a quality of life within its parameters; (2) seeking local answers for local needs by using local materials and skills, while making use of advanced science and technology; and (3) creating new values, addressing priority needs, and preserving plural identities. The document recommended several ways in which these ideas could be put into practice. The recommendations included consciousness raising exercises, establishment of well-planned design institutions, dissemination of knowledge, and the inculcation of new values throughout the country. This was a manifesto of appropriate design for the developing world. Ten years later, the same plea is made by Chee Peng Lim.5 Asoke Chatterjee, an educationist from India, commenting on the practical application of these ideologies, stated in unambiguous terms: "Yet, the original inspiration for bringing design to this land (India) . . . remains virtually untouched. Basic needs . . . are outside the designer's purview, challenging the conscience of this young profession and its ancient inheritance."6 The questions posed are, therefore, centered around educational ideals and pragmatic realities and are inextricably woven around theories and policies of development—will the benefits trickle down? Must the emphasis be on acquiring the necessary sophisticated skills and experience in operating on that more international sector, or must the relevance or irrelevance of a design skill be constantly tested and contested?

Beginning with the 1970s, according to S. Balaram, another industrial designer from India, the design profession began to gain respectability in the country but not necessarily entirely in the manner envisaged by the Ahmedabad Declaration. A small number of professional designers, numbering 600 in all, found themselves in great demand, with many of them absorbed in the more glamorous types of activities, leading to Balaram's wry remark that, in the 1970s, the "designer star" was born.' This glamour image was promoted primarily by the wealthy, private consumer sector, where design acquired a snob value and sometimes snugly fitted in with traditional aspirations of ostentation associated with oriental courtly life. The image of ostentation at the extreme end of the economic and cultural spectrum, now appears in the super affluent circles in the form of "megamarriages," where high technology, affluence, and fantasy provide a strange combination in which professional design help is sought to create the desired ambience. Computeraided design and laser technology are used to inscribe on the blue firmament two hearts being pierced by a common arrow, with the names of the bride and groom dutifully inserted. Such extravaganzas are being planned, at the time of writing, for the opening of the French National Festival in Bombay, which will introduce more technological gimmicks to a very receptive audience. This festival is a French response to the Indian National Festivals, which, in their attempt to create a favorable impression of India abroad, contribute to a high-society profile for the design profession. These events are highly jazzed-up occasions that provide individual designers with opportunities to obtain lucrative national and international contracts and add a certain quality  gamour. This is, however, a mixed blessing. In the Philippines, this flamboyant image was a part of the "Imelda Cult," fostered by the former First Lady's form of patronage of art and design.

There are major variants to this design approach and to the range of the spectrum from country to country and between sectors within each country in Asia. But there is an underlying unity marked by heavy reliance on imported models. Shou Zhi Wang, a design historian from Guangzhou, categorically states, "China had no modern design education until the late 1970s. Design education has been formed mainly in Western countries. Without an international design education structure and curriculum, China has no way to develop its own structure and curriculum."8 Competition, an open-market economy, and export drives are seen as the necessary stimulants for design activity. The NIC model is far too overpowering and the temptations to imitate Hong Kong far too strong in motivating China in its drive toward modernity to enable any thought-provoking debates to emerge just as yet. Whether the NIC model can at all be replicated, given the dramatic changes in the geopolitical and geoeconomic situations and vast differences in cultural specifics, and what precisely is to be learned from this model are still baffling the developmentalists. The design schools in China are meanwhile gearing themselves to capitalizing on their cheap labor factor and on imitating Western design, as a part of the export drive. Fashion magazines are coming of age in China and The Central Academy of Arts and Design, Beijing, has launched its first issue of a magazine, entitled Design. The magazine is in Chinese but with a table of contents in English. This publication will, in all likelihood, be the first of the tidal wave of information on First World design, and to resist being swept away by powerful tidal waves is difficult, particularly after an era of parched isolation. The essential question is whether this approach to design is a necessary corollary to the forms of development planned, particularly in the wake of the failure of state capitalism.

If design is viewed from this perspective, and very few cogent alternative "ways of seeing," to use an expression of John Berger, have emerged, then the Proton Sagas and the Marutis, et al., are simply appendixes in the histories of Western/Japanese design, at best, and footnotes, at worst. Their issues are closely tied with open-market economy, competition, global markets, and so on, which are issues vital for survival but, nevertheless, in too embryonic a stage as far as design is concerned for tomes to be written. This early stage of development is a contributing factor to the absence of books on Asian design (other than Japanese) or even a good design magazine. There is just not the confidence yet to write one nor is there a consensus as to what exactly is this alternative way of perceiving design, even though there is a growing feeling among a minority that there exists, or certainly ought to exist, another way of approaching the whole subject. Design issues in Asia, I feel, have to be perceived in the context of this slowly emerging "new ways of seeing" and in all the open-ended questions that are being asked. Although some questions raised are only of regional relevance, others are global and form the part of a worldwide concern on the manner in which development is taking place.

If design is perceived as an ancient activity that has gone on for several centuries rather than as a brand new profession, then our whole perception of what constitutes Asian design begins to change and, thenceforth, issues pertaining to Asian design assume different forms. The transition from seeing things in terms of continuity to seeing things in terms of discontinuity marks the principal break between traditional design and modern design.

Colonialism and the erratic pace of postindependence industrialization have caused considerable dislocation in countries such as India. The designer's main task in these countries is to operate at the levels of protohistoric continuities and chaotic discontinuities and to introduce a sense of order into this highly fragmented environment. The design profession must cope with both endogenous and exogenous agents of transformation. This situation possibly accounts for the operation of dual forces: a very great capacity for integration and modernization and very powerful mechanisms of exclusion and marginalization. Designers who wish to address the issues of the marginalized majority must start a brand new learning process and attune themselves to different socioeconomic realities and cultural behavior patterns. There exists no common vocabulary between the integrated and the marginalized.

The present-day dynamic blend of pragmatic functionalism and ideological mass consumerism is very new in Asia. It is a part of a new evangelical post-War/post-Colonial capitalism, a creed that was introduced in much of Asia at about the same time that the concept of development was becoming a much debated issue. Modern design schools were set up to cope with the massive import substitution that followed on the wake of independence. These were quite distinct from the nineteenth century art or industrial arts, or art and industry schools that were established in different centers of the British Empire in India.

The rise of these industrial arts schools and the nineteenthcentury polemics involved in the setting up of these schools not only form an interesting chapter in the Arts and Crafts movement in the British colonies overseas, but throw light on some of the legacies of industrial design in India. In the Industrial Arts Exhibition in London in 1851, the Indian pavilion attracted enormous attention and the whole collection of East India Company exhibits were bought for a new British museum to provide "the highest instructional value to students in design." The expressed hope was that by exposure to the suggestiveness of some of these Asian design elements the "vulgarities in art manufactures . . . of England .. may be corrected."1o This not only confirms the existence of design traditions in India, but also and much more important, throws light on the manner in which oriental design was perceived by members of the Arts and Crafts school who were the main connoisseurs of these exhibits. On the advice of people such as William Morris, the decision to establish arts and industries schools in India was made. Soon, however, the changes in the forms of patronage, coupled with the long, drawn-out arguments between the Occidentalists and Orientalists, totally altered the aims of design education in India. Both British and Occidental Indians believed that what ought to be taught in these schools should be Western nineteenth-century academic art and crafts useful for the needs of the Public Works Department. Schools were set up in new, big colonial towns, which had no tradition of crafts. Not surprising, the early students were rejects from the formal institutions of learning." The new forms of buildings and lifestyles required draftsmen and workers who could adequately carry out instructions based on designs provided from Britain, and soon the colleges of art and industry became culturally arid and produced mechanistic, soulless objects.

The poor quality of crafts exhibited just 20 years later in the 1871 exhibition dramatically revealed the damage done by this system of design education. The so-called crafts as part of the great tradition slowly withered away but continued to survive as rural subsistence modes of production. Both the systems of patronage and the social categories under which they operated were transformed, not by predominantly endogenous forces born of economic intellectual and industrial transformations, but mainly by exogenous factors and at an immense speed. The transformations were also very sectoral, both in the groups of people they affected and in the areas of activities they touched upon. This sectoral aspect made the holistic claim of an allembracing design philosophy from "sofa cushion to urban planning" untenable, for the key characteristic of these transformations were fragmentation. The new students of design were not drawn from the ancient craft sector but from the modern educational system, and traditional crafts as sources of inspiration often had to be relearned.

The new design schools were inheritors of a new tradition. This was the age of Bauhausian ideologies being transplanted into the Indian soil by teachers trained in the eminent design schools of Europe. It was also broadly the age of Le Corbusier's Chandigarh and Nehru's vision of a new India, decolonized, modern, and international, poised for an industrial takeoff. These were symptomatic of the new age in Asia. This new age was marked by the hope and conviction that by the right mix of technology and capital input and by the right degree of government intervention, the country could take a giant step from medieval, feudal, and colonial inequality to enlightened democracy and a more equitable distribution of wealth while establishing a rational, secular sense of order. The change was to be accomplished by administrative fiats and large doses of government intervention to offset the inadequacy of endogenous forces of change.

No wonder then that neither of the terms design nor development have natural equivalents in most of the Asian linguistic traditions, for they carry with them all the ideological underpinnings of First World associations, aspirations, and debates. This realization and, more recently, the deep dissatisfaction that has followed this realization, both from an ideological/cultural as well as a pragmatic point of view, has led to some very serious soul searching among the thinking designers of Asia in recent years.

On the pragmatic plane, this soul searching was prompted by the recognition of two sad home truths. First, post-war political independence failed to generate for most of the Third World countries of Asia national, international, or structural independence. Second, the unbalanced growth within the Asian nation states has generated a kind of maldevelopment, creating a "twin nation" syndrome in which a low-growth, near subsistence-level majority economy coexists with a high-growth, minority elite sector. The latter is marked by a sharp rise in expendable incomes, thereby fueling a consumer boom. Both of these are forms of dependency, that is, internal and external, and both have led to insecurity, imbalance, unequal exchange, and finally exploitation. The means and goals of development have become enmeshed in a structure based on consumption patterns and propensity to consume, often at the cost of deprivation and drainage of the other social strata, especially the bottom quarter.

Some Asian LDCs, such as India, have not yet been able to produce a coherent, consistent, grassroot-oriented development approach and model. "There is talk of a self-reliant model on the one hand and imitation of the Western maldevelopment model on the other hand."1 The First World's models of development are consumption-demand-creative and, hence, consumerist, labor saving and, therefore, capital and technology intensive, and, finally, overdeveloping." The designers, caught in this schizophrenia of developmental models are expected to be sensitive to and operate at disparate levels of ethnic specificity and economic disparity and come to grips with grassroot problem solving. This task is so mind boggling that much of the design discourse often degenerates into verbal platitudes, at worst, and sporadic conscience easing exercises, at best. For example, even the most talented and well-meaning architects and designers have been accused of having a double personality—on the one hand, the international-conference image, upholding appropriate and innovative technology/design, and, on the other, the hard-core reality of the upper-crust client's need of imitating First World lifestyles. ven if the cynics are right, the discourse is at least bringing certain issues to the forefront; repeated verbalization must rub off, and several new projects are being designed with local sensibilities in mind. Design education curricula are planned with long-term objectives in mind, and the young designers trained in these institutes should look for models to suit specific needs. The resumés of design students looking for jobs show increasingly well-designed lists of projects undertaken to solve problems of basic needs. This observation is not made in a purely cynical vein, for role ideals are at least being provided, even if they are not always easy to transform into tangible realities. There is an idealistic element in the learning process.

Imported solutions to local problems have proved unworkable in many cases, ither becausecs r the totalalienation  the solution from the reality of the problem, or a combination of both. Low-cost housing has proven too expensive to benefit those for whose benefit it was originally planned, has failed to take into consideration the socioeconomic and psychological requirements of the targeted occupants, or, simply, has made a mockery of what the programs were supposed to stand for. A classic example of the last phenomenon is the creation of Islamabad as the Islamic capital of Pakistan which has as much of the essence of Islam in its architecture and town planning as a supermarket complex in downtown Boston.

This search for an appropriate cultural model and apprehension at the loss of cultural identity was effectively voiced by Lee Kwan Yew, Singapore's Prime Minister, when he expressed the fear that Singaporeans would become the flotsam and jetsam of Western mass culture floating on Asian waters. Cultural and economic divides (and their related issues) form a part of the problem for designers in their quest for a "modern" and "national" visual identity.

This "common cultural substance" that makes nations consisting vaguely of national ideas and products is in most countries of Asia, in a queer manner, in a state of becoming and a state of being at the same time."3 This process of cultural transformation and of constant attempts at defining and redefining culture in a self-conscious manner is part of the existentialist anxiety of the newly emerging or newly decolonized states of Asia, be it of American-dominated Philippines or British-dominated South Asia.

With decolonization and the achievement of independence, this interest in restating one's culture has received an official definition. Language, national history, archeological monuments, folk arts and crafts, classical music, dance, and drama have become symbols of modern national identities, alongside the national emblems, Five Year Plans, parliamentary institutions, and atomic installations. The definition is selective and creative. A traditional culture, notably that of large countries such as India, is too vast and variegated to be displayed adequately in Republic Day parades, and not all cultural traits are regarded as suitable for display. It is thought best for some to wither away in provincial obscurity.

Those cultures that become active visible symbols of the officially sponsored "unity in diversity" ideology undergo a tremendous change by the very nature of their new roles. Tribes that are expected to perform a fertility rite dance every time a state dignitary arrives or that are exported as parts of National Festivals

acquire a certain self-consciousness and a new kind of fossilization. Quite often, a living culture with a primordialist identity uses this identity as an instrument to acquire economic resources, regional autonomy, and political power. When these expectations are not met, the claim to be the only "sons of the soil" is voiced and all others are boycotted as aliens. How much of cultural pluralism? What aspects of culture? What kind of identity? The nation state, by its very existence, is expected to act as an agent of change in integrating the whole country by suppressing active primordialist loyalties and, yet, promoting cultural awareness as a source of creativity. As an agent of modernization, it is expected to absorb imported technology and create the right infrastructure for these exogenous forces to be adopted and indigenized. What form will a centrally patronized plural culture adopt? What visual means of cultural identity should the mass media portray? Regional? National? Mixed? In what proportions?

Here too designers have the dual task of documenting and understanding ethnicity and regional cultures, for understanding them is the essential first step to evolving a medium of visual communication and restoring local confidence in an age when traditional institutions are crumbling fast and benefits of industrialization are yet to trickle down. Documenting hitherto undocumented and little-understood material has become one of the main educational tasks of the enlightened design schools of Asia. The National Institute of Design in Ahmedabad, India, for example, has accumulated vast amounts of information on the lifestyles and socioeconomic conditions of people living in several regional belts. To be involved in the task of helping local craftsmen improve their tools of operation or introduce them to elements of modern design, the introducer must know what they know, where their talents lie, and under what social and market forces they operate. This basic information is unavailable as mainstream secondary education provides very little provision for understanding conditions near the home of the students, and institutions of knowledge particularly in English medium schools cater to students who have little understanding of majority culture. The inculcation of sensitivity to local environments and empathy with people working under conditions outside parameters of middle class urban existence is one of the tasks that design educators believe is imperative. Despite all attempts and in spite of winning design awards, the communication media in India still remain remote from the common man or woman. Evidence is seen in a recent set of award-winning posters for contraceptives done as part of the social marketing of a birth control program—the faces of an affluent, beaming family of three adorn the posters. The unappreciated reality in the cases of the underprivileged is that having a large family often means more chances of economic survival as children are hired out from the ages of six and seven to act as factory, agricultural, or domestic labor.

One cannot help feeling a certain sense of deja vu, of going back to the turn of the century when the full impact of the first wave of Western ideas and technological power was first felt. At that time, the intellectuals sought answers either in wholesale Westernization or in returning to their native roots. The Asian response to the first wave of Western ideas and technology produced the Alisjahbanas and the Kemal Ataturks, the Nehrus and the Gandhis, the U Nus and the Ho Chi Minhs. There are, however, major differences. The West represented to the educated Asian a pool of ideas: the Protestant work ethic and utilitarian liberalism, scientific rationalism and philosophic positivism, socialist romanticism and Marxist radicalism, and above al, self-righteous nationalism, operating ironically enough within the framework of unacceptable colonialism. Above all, it stood for an ordered, planned environment, both physical and cultural, ideologically neat and physically sanitary. The West then was a source of inspiration for Asian thinkers, even as they were plotting the overthrow of Western rule, and Western thought trickled down to the masses after going through several sieves and filters.

The present-day second wave of Westernism or, more strictly speaking, "First Worldism" (for Japan is a great trendsetter) is vastly different. It consists of a mass consumer-oriented movement that has reached remote village societies. National VCRs and Sony Trinitron TVs have become household aspirations, resulting from unprecedented advances in information technology. So the average new "Westernizer" in Asia has a new faith in a kind of acquisitive individualistic hedonism, expressed on a large scale. This holds that what gives the individual maximum material pleasure is the moral good and that the most ideal form of pleasure is to be defined in terms of the acquisition, possession, and consumption of material objects. Traditionally, this philosophy was meant only for the feudal lords; currently, it is the part of mass expectations and, without proper distributive policies and operating under conditions where only a few of the traditional checks are still valid, it could become an overwhelmingly destructive force.

This trend is buttressed by two factors that have come into play during the past decade. Asian labor is being exported to other countries. In 1986, for example, 15 million Indians were living abroad. In the remote hills of Hunza, Pakistan, many have returned after working in West Germany, where, thanks to the efforts of the Aga Khan, short-term contracts are worked out for the Hunzakites. Pakistanis have for long been drawn to the oil rich Middle East. Apart from this personal contact, exposure to foreign education and foreign media has exerted a tremendous influence on the consumption patterns of the elite minority sector within these countries. This exposure coincides with a period of new and vigorous consumerism in the West and a virtual explosion in all forms of the entertainment media.

The third wave of First World thought is concerned with ecology and quality of life. This prompted the New Year issue of

Time magazine to nominate the planet Earth as the planet of the year, with the caption "Endangered Earth" instead of the usual "Man of the Year." Such fears are understood only by a small minority worldwide and by even a smaller minority in the developing countries. The argument often heard from industrialists and manufacturers and even from the general populace is that ecological considerations are the luxuries of the developed world. The race for development must go on and the only rules that are known to have succeeded in the past are the ones that the First World, after its own success is assured, has finally begun to question. Concerned people, visual communicators included, are trying to raise the consciousness of those around them to these vital issues.

Meanwhile, the dominant economic elites in these countries, totaling a vast number even if they are a small percent of the total population of the Asian LDCs, constitute a market that is qualitatively clearly differentiated from the majority subsistence sector and their demands are different not only in degrees but also in kind. For example, just 18 percent of India's 21,000 publications are in English, but they account for more than half of all the money spent on printed advertising. Industrial goods, private cards, office furniture, and anything to do with slightly sophisticated technology is advertised only in English. The reason is because the top 10 percent of the professional and modern business sector alone constitute the market and this affluent intelligentsia is English educated. Anyway, most advertisement designers and copywriters would be too completely divorced from the native Indian sector to be able to produce a decent advertisement exercise in any of the vernacular languages. The recruiting policies of advertising firms only accentuates this phenomenon, as their copywriters are mainly drawn from the English speaking sectors, who can spot the international trends.

Thus, restatements of culture are now receiving urgent attention from totally different quarters and for completely different reasons. What is similar about first wave and second wave responses to external stimuli, however, is the concern of intellectuals with issues of culture. There is also a great deal of skepticism associated with this self-conscious designing of culture. Thus, Doreen Fernandes, who is actively involved with the Aquino Government's decisions regarding cultural policy, expresses deep concern about what she calls "the giant inferiority complex" of the colonial mind, which makes a Filipino "dress, sing, dance American" and where the American dream is inextricably woven with images of "Dynasty," "Miami Vice," and "L.A. Law."14 The Alliance of Artists is clamoring for a rejuvenation of national culture and asking the Aquino Government to form a Ministry of Culture. On the other hand, there are people such as Alfred Yuson, poet and novelist, who disdainfully dismiss attempts at Filipinization of culture as just "another bromide, like democratization." The key question is the definition of what constitutes a Filipino culture and this is crucial to the visual form that it will take in the years to come—wil it be subsumed undermass American culture or will its ?

Modernization in most Asian countries is seen as a willed mobilization of forces by the state. In most of these countries, the government is not only a major client—a buyer of products and services—but also the agent of change, and, hence, designers in Asia feel that they have to lobby their respective governments to introduce national design policies that will dovetail with developmental policies, thereby making design an agent of the visual manifestation of the ideologies of development. Thus, if the fundamental aim of the developmentalist is to provide national confidence and selfreliance and bring in some sense of equity, visible symbols of this confidence and self-reliance will have to be shown not only in the styles of architecture adopted, but also in the materials and processes adopted, the manner of advertising undertaken, the styles of clothing exhibited, the nature of products manufactured, and the skill in converting modern imported technology into products distinctive for the specific needs of the people. In an economically and culturally splintered society, this overall cohesive planning for "the common good," as the utilitarians would have phrased it, is not an easy task. Nonetheless, there is an intense awareness of and a desire to foster autonomous and indigenous development among designers and developmentalists.

The British architect, Lawrie Baker, often called "the only Indian Architect," advocates mud buildings, not only as the only solution to the one family, one home idea in India, but also from the point of view of the amount of energy involved in producing the material. He concedes that for mud buildings to be acceptable, the right status associations would have to be provided; acceptance should start with the upper middle class, the moneyed people, even the Prime Minister living in mud houses. ASTRA (Application of Science and Technology for Rural Areas) has built a whole complex of school buildings using compressed earth blocks in the southern Indian city of Bangalore for the children of the Indian Institute of Science staff members. This complex seems to work very well and to withstand all the pressures of school children's joi de vivre!

Such an approach to design is a part of a historical legacy of India, a continuation of the Gandhian ideology, and owes its origins to the days of the swadeshi (literally, an adjective meaning "of one's own country" and denoting objects locally produced with indigenous material and local skills) movement, which combined economic realism with the political power struggle against British colonialism. This Gandhian ethos pervaded the Indian environment in the form of the handloom, homespun cloth, the khadi, the low Indian stool, the vernacular dwelling, the village handcrafted slippers, and a whole lifestyle, attitudes, and values that were inculcated with the sole purpose of giving Indians a sense of confidence and cultural dignity in an age of foreign domination. Gandhi had an almost uncanny intuition of investing objects with a meaning. Following partly on this model, Balaram advocates a Maoist operational tactic of evolving a system of "barefoot designers,"15 who could serve the craft sector desperately in need not only of design input but also of design management, with all its ancillaries such as marketing, legal aid, etc. Another talented designer, Dasarath Patel, denounces the present system of arranging production and distribution of goods as a new form of colonialism operating within the country, the exploitation of the village by the city and the expropriation of the profit by the middleman. Such designers see their role as "mediators," "appropriating technology from a structure that is inaccessible to the common man" and see the answer in providing the village craftsmen the necessary confidence to create objects that will have local relevance. They see themselves as advisors on the choice of materials and processes within the reach of the impoverished craftsmen and as rejuvenators of the vernacular skill and understanding. They see design activity as a team activity, a participatory activity, and as closely related to raising the social awareness and self-confidence of people.

Thus, as Balaram points out, use of CAD/CAM for designing a more effective basic sickle or a bullock cart in India should not be seen as an anachronism but as a necessary and innovative use of technology for a society operating under two widely disparate levels.16 Again, graphic designers should address the problems of the uneducated washerman whose own traditional methods of identifying clients' washing is severely being put to trial by the complexities of urban life. Projects such as these undertaken by the design students, even if done only during the idealistic school days when they are removed from the harsher realities of job hunting, reflect attempts at redefining design and placing it within a more complex social and political paradigm.

Designers are beginning to redefine their role in the context of the search for self-confidence, the need to face local problems, and the readiness to come up with dignified, relevant, and esthetically pleasing solutions. There are few stories of success to serve as inspiration for others to follow.

The emphasis keeps shifting from cultural identity as a source of confidence and self-awareness and, hence, self-enrichment to the simple practical cry that imported design solutions are not functional. Yasmeen Lari summarizes the plight of the Karachi slum dweller, who, when rehoused in a modern block of flats, had just one simple query of the developer and the urban/architectural planner: Where shall I house the chickens? Chickens were not luxury pets but a life-sustaining subsidiary source of income for the family. Balaram pointed out the case of the fishermen in Madras, who, when they were rehoused in modern high-rise apartments, rented their low-cost housing and moved back to the slums on the beach."7 The old slums have a well-developed social structure and provided the necessary security to its inhabitants in times of need. The self-contained flat systems could be effectively operated only by the slightly more affluent, with access to other infrastructural benefits. Pakistan and some states in India have not realized the cost-effectiveness of upgrading informal settlements rather than resorting to slum clearance.

On the one hand, while Singapore is exporting its construction skills all over Asia and putting up multistoried structures in China and even in Brunei,8 Sri Lanka is restricting the heights of buildings to four stories. As Nimal De Silva, the architect conservationist from Colombo pointed out, apart from the issue of retaining a cultural identity in the built environment, the LDCs working with less-efficient provisions for putting out fires and usually poorer maintenance standards could hardly cope with the safety hazards posed by multistoried blocks.® When a high-rise building becomes either a status symbol of modernity or a product of the excessive greed of land speculators, the solution has to be sought on the basis of the local conditions. The designers realize that the modern International Style cannot be a standardized method of solving problems. The Lawrie Bakers and the Ishwarbhai Patels²2 and the Yantra Vidyalaya are all the inheritors of the philosophy of alternative design and the basic needs approach to development, which had its heyday in the West in the 1970s.21

Furthermore, there is quite another dimension of design in the LDCs of Asia. The faith that design will, in conjunction with modern marketing and management practices, also evolve products for both the sophisticated markets at home and the international markets. In short, design and development is a quest for non-standardized answers in an age of standardization, where the faith in standardization, be it of specifications for a product or culture, is seen as a simple, economic, and efficient answer. Economies of scale and the globalization of markets in addition to making a lot of economic sense, provide the necessary teleological arguments for those who subscribe to the convergence theory of industrial development. Much of the polemics concerning design and development in Asia is centered around this inherent tension between the local and the global, both in the material and cultural sense. At one end of the design spectrum are those who believe that the Asian countries can and will achieve First World standards of living if only the right technological mix can be worked out and the right degree of patience and the necessary amount of time required for the trickle-down effect to take place can be achieved. At the other end of the spectrum are those who believe in the Center-Periphery modalities, view development and underdevelopment as corollaries of each other, and consider the built-in unequal relations between the center and periphery as a structural barrier to economic development.

The rise of the NICs has strengthened the first school who advocate a strong export-oriented drive. Egged on by the NICs model and by IMF and World Bank recommendations, there is a great impetus for producing both traditional and nontraditional goods for the export market. Whether the NIC model is replicable as mentioned earlier, is an ever present debate.

Designers caught in these debates have experimented with different approaches. Rajiv Sethi, a Delhi-based designer, felt that by combining Indian craft skill with design input from the West and by cashing in on the international reputation of designers such as Mario Bellini and Ettore Sottsass and others, an international market can be created that would provide modern hand crafted objects.22 The experiment met with only very limited success and aroused a heated debate. There are other designers, such as Laila Tyabji and a whole group of people who have formed themselves into a pressure group called the Dastakar, who believe that craft must have a steady market to survive and that exposing the part-time craftsmen from the villages to the vagaries of the international markets would be dangerous without sacrificing quality and the security and solidarity of the craftsmen's regular native clientele. Their objective is to make crafts a part of everyday living. Laila Tyabji works on maintaining a steady flow of excellent quality workmanship in embroidered and appliqued cloth, while members of such groups as INTACH are trying to revive a whole traditional patronage network for crafts, so that the revived cottage industries could be sustained by a slow but predictable growth in the market. They believe in restoring historic monuments, not simply as museum pieces but as means of reviving a way of life that could incorporate labor intensive and low-capital industries. These are a few examples of nongovernmental sectors in operation. The design input is to help the craftsmen to understand the market, and the designers often have to decide how much and in what manner traditional designs should be preserved, altered, or abandoned to suit modern demands. Designers also try to introduce design-related marketing principles to the vernacular craft sector. The question remains: Are they trying to turn the clock back? Their answer is that at this moment in the socioeconomic life of India, such revivals are endogenous agents of social transformation and an indigenous solution to rapid social and economic dislocation.

The thinking design world as the thinking world of the developmentalist is thick with ominous question marks "as menacing as incipient schizophrenia." This is paraphrasing Misha Black and his comments were applied to the world of Western design, where he saw the schizophrenia manifesting itself in the miasma of developmental doubts, of obsolescence and transience of products, of wastage because of unnecessary duplication and the cosy comfort of a welcoming mass market. All this appears on an exaggerated canvas on the Asian scene. The size of the population, the rate of inequality, the speed with which industrialization is taking place, the scale at which ecological damage is going on and seen as an inevitable price of progress, the enormity of the cleavage between the haves and have nots, and the accelerated speed of cultural differences between sections of the community inhabiting the same nation state are projecting issues on such a large scale that as Carl Aubock, the Viennese designer emphatically stated, "we need to dream of a new vision" for we are closer to a colossal revolution of a scale we have never before witnessed.23
