> 来源：The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M\The idea of design _ a design issues reader -- Margolin, Victor, 1941-; Buchanan, Richard -- A Design issues reader,, Cambridge, Mass, M.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Development of Modern Japanese Design: A Personal Account Takuo Hirano

During the past forty years Japan has gone from being a country in which there were no designers, much less design education, to one where currently there are large numbers of designers and myriad design education opportunities. To chronicle my career in design and desig education in Japan, albeit a personal account, therefore, is to document the growth and expansion of these related activities in Japan, as well. This growth in design has been considerable, and although basic issues and areas of concern must still be resolved, heightened corporate, commercial, and public awareness of the function of design now exists, which is an encouraging indication that designers can, indeed play reater ole hancing the qualiyi

## Education and early career

My interest in creating things as a youngster led to my enrollment in the Tokyo National University of Fine Arts and Music in 1953, where I majored in crafts. During my third year, I entered a vase in a competitive exhibition. My delight turned to frustration and then to anger upon discovering that visitors were not allowed to touch or handle the displayed objects. If prospective users could not touch an object in which they were interested, how then could they decide whether or not to procure it? I strongly believed that works of art were meant to be appreciated and used. I therefore embarked on a project to hand produce well-designed ashtrays; at the time only crudely made, functional and overpriced ashtrays were available. After many long hours of work I began thinking about machine production, not only to alleviate my own labor but to lower the cost to the consumer.

I share this vignette because the experience led me to consult my academic advisor prior to graduation about remaining in school to pursue studies in technology. After listening patiently to my reasons, my professor recommended that I enter the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and seek assignment to its patent office. I followed his advice and became a patent application examiner. For two years I was absorbed in studying a wide range of applications, not only to fulfill my responsibilities but to quench my thirst for information about technological advances.

I digress here to note that these were the years following the end of World War II when Japan was still war ravaged and strewn

with rubble. Gradually, using salvaged lathes and presses, and tin cans and bottles discarded by the United States military forces, Japanese manufacturing started up again with the production of toy cups, saucers, and pans. By 1953, Japanese goods were competing with European-made products in the American market to the extent that moves to suppress imports from Japan were being made. Many imitation goods, particularly cigarette lighters, toys, tableware, and other such products were being used in daily life. These Japanese goods were cheap but poorly made, and the paints used in manufacturing some of them were highly toxic. About the same time, the Japanese government vigorously promoted industry's use of designers but there were none. No institutions of higher learning, including my alma mater, offered courses in industrial design. At best, sculptors and painters engaged in industrial design as a hobby. Troubled by this situation, the government established a study-abroad program specifically aimed at training industrial designers. But burdened with tremendous debts, Japan could only afford to send four persons abroad per year. To further hasten the educational process, the government also requested that four-year programs of study be shortened to one-year. The schools abroad agreed and it was under this scheme that I, as a member of the second group sent overseas, departed for Los Angeles. At the Art Center School (currently the Art Center College of Design) both day and evening courses awaited me. Needless to say, the program was extremely strenuous and I was frequently perplexed and surprised. For example, soon after my arrival, my first project was to redesign a hand mixer. In retrospect it may seem foolish, but at the time I did not have the faintest idea what a hand mixer was, where it was used, or for what purpose. Despite the problems of adaptation, however, there was great stimulus in finding new things that made sense, so although always challenged, I was never bored or dissatisfied. Using high-quality American, British, and German art supplies and takig courses ot available in Japan, including basic design, human engineering, plastic and metal materials, I completed the four-year course in approximately one year. Uponmy return o Jpan, Iwas shockd and disppnte by the belated development of Japanese industry. As an MITI bureaucrat I was iven teaching and consulting respnsbilis, in addition to my administrative duties. I was assigned to teach what I ha erne Unit SateheTokyoNatal niy o n r  usic he W ol F rt  e ask ois  ie pn bout he for export to the United States and, perhaps more important, of educating these companies about new approaches to design. In due course, Japan moved from exporting imitations to freshly designed products. No doubt, governmental encouragement

of newly designed products was appropriate at the time, but over the years a shift from traditional habits, forms, and measurements has also resulted. The gradual distancing of Japanese products from classical modes of production and the need to adapt to new systems and cultural patterns are some of the prime concerns today.

The design education that I offered at the three universities mentioned above was appraised highly and attended by faculty and students from other institutions, as well. Some classroom space was provided by MITI for additional evening sessions but soon that arrangement proved insufficient. Other facilities were procured and a new school, Our Design School, was founded. The faculty was comprised of persons who had studied in Germany, Italy, and the United States. Thirty percent of the students were already employed as designers by manufacturers, the remaining seventy percent were students enrolled at other universities. What began as a volunter effort soon developed into a thriving learning center. To generate funds to pay the teachers, I established a design office staffed by myself and three students. We provided manufacturers with designs for the actual production of goods and thereby earned a sufficient income to remunerate the teachers. During this period, in 1960, I resigned from my full-time position at MITI to concentrate on design and design education.

In 1965, Our Design School closed. By that time, design education opportunities were available in universities and within companies, at least in the Tokyo metropolitan area. Furthermore, graduates of the school were teaching in various places. Our Design School had served as the training site for the first pool of design educators

## Teaching and design education

During the subsequent years, I have concentrated on teaching design and design management and have devoted time to serving on government councils. In 1965, I began a three-year teaching assignment at the Kyoto City University of Arts, where I taught basic design. That opportunity later proved to be the first step in building a bridge to new design in western Japan. My current affiliation with Tama Art University, a top tier art institution, began in 1970. There I introduced a new pedagogical approach in which a student and faculty member together select a subject or theme, search for an ambiguous or unknown problem, and work toward a resolution. This teaching method is effective and an appropriate venue for strengthening the student-teacher relationship which, in turn, improves the quality of education. Since 1978, I have also taught at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, a national university renowned for its excellence in the natural and applied sciences. When I first began teaching industrial design there, only 15 students enrolled in my class. Currently, I have more than 200 students. I like to think that the importance of design has taken root, even in this bastion of science and technology.

Traditionally, education in Japan, as in other Asian countries, is based on a one-on-one relationship between student and teacher in which the student observes and then imitates the teacher. The traditional arts of calligraphy, classical dance, flower arrangement, painting, and the tea ceremony follow this learning mode. It is believed that long years of practicing established patterns lead to high levels of accomplishment. Of course, some students of these arts do create something new with their own imaginations, but they are few.

When the more efficient, European model of education was introduced to Japan in the 1850s, it was quickly and enthusiastically accepted but with minimal understanding of its basic tenets. Focus was placed on the structure, organization, and methodology rather than on the underlying philosophy. As I view the current educational scene, I find that little has changed and wonder if this is simply a reflection of the traditional Japanese way of thinking. This has been true in my own experience: when I have introduced new and different teaching methods, others have been quick to assimilate the structure and methodology but few have understood the philosophy, the basic design spirit.

Among my students, unfortunately, more than a few graduates are convinced that they have learned and understood design but few truly comprehend the fundamentals. In my introductory design courses, for example, I cover paper structure in a laboratory session. Most students simply follow the models made by previous students rather than creating new models. They do not recognize the relevance of folding a single sheet of paper in half, the way it is strengthened perpendicularly along the folded side, making it stronger than before and not so easily destroyed. This fundamental exercise is applicable to paper packaging and automobile design, of course, but most students only perceive the exercise per se, not the link to more complex forms of design. Fault lies not only with the student but with teachers as wel, for too often both fail to recognize the basic elements.

Another fundamental aspect of design that I integrate into teaching is working with clients. At least half of a designer's time is spent meeting and working with everyone from the company president to the machinists who finally assemble the product. If a designer is not only to convince decision makers about new design ideas but to promote full understanding, which leads to total commitment and effective followup, then working with people will take an inordinate amount of time. Without the recognition and comprehension of this designer role, I see little chance for even the best design to be realized.

## Design practice

Having to earn enough money to pay the teachers at Our Design School led to the establishment of my own design firm, which I ch I hasnerably n ar now has 70 specialist designers, based in Tokyo and Chicago. To maintain a focus on underlying principles rather than the practice of skills, the organizational emphasis is on design management. The central core of our management style is conceptual design. Organized around it are the design specialties which enhance and reinforce the management core. No barriers between the architectural, interior, product, communication, and packaging design functions exist. The precise role of each function and its relationship to the others depends othe proe qeti. This hasn he s ment function enables the specialists to work to their fullest potential on any given project within a framework of overall management direction and, at the same time, to provide feedback to the design management core. Thus, our firm is organized organically capable of adapting to new challenges and opportunities, rather than rigidly by an inhibiting structure with hierarchical and lateral lines of responsibility and communication.

We design across a broad spectrum, from single products to whole systems, including the design or redesign of entire corporate structures. In each case, we initially assess the entire organization and focus on the operational, communication, and decision-making processes. Neither the size nor the nature of the company with which we deal alters our approach. Our team for such projects usually numbers between two and five designers and relationships with clients vary from four to more than twenty-five years. Even though the number of our clients increases and we maintain relationships with a growing number of firms, we find it unnecessary to increase staff because as both our expertise and our clients' understanding develop, long consultations are not required. Shorter but higher quality sessions with key personnel result in effective design management.

Our commitment, in every case, is to reconcile and creatively synthesize three important demands, all of which are necessary to maintain the high standards of design: the ultimate satisfaction of users' needs and expectations; the designers' concepts and aspirations; and the producer's commercial and economic plans and limitations.

## Professional activities

In addition to my work in education and professional practice, I also continue to engage in numerous activities related to promoting and improving the understanding of design among manufacturers and the general public. For example, I currently serve on MITI's Export Inspection and Design Promotion Council and as a judge of G-Mark products. Both activities indicate that the Japanese government both supports and promotes design excellence and recognizes that design is an essential component of commercial success. The G-Mark system, with its "Good Design Products Section" under the jurisdiction of MITI and organized by the Japan Industrial Design

Promotion Organization, was established in 1957. At the time, imitation goods were rampant and the Japanese government was eager to build public awareness of well-designed products. More than thirty years later, research indicates that fifty percent of the general public knows of and recognizes the G-Mark seal placed on selected products. Designers of these products are given recognition within their firms for their accomplishment and are usually promoted. In addition, sales personnel find that promoting products with G-Mark seals is easier. Since 1984, in a major extension of the scheme, non-Japanese products have also been awarded G-Marks and introduced to the Japanese public. Indications are that this system is contributing to an increase in imports to Japan.

## Basic approach

As a teacher, practitioner, or participant in professional activities, my basic approach is the same, to be dynamic and allow for adaptation to varying circumstances. The learning creative-developmental process can be represented as a spiral. Viewed from the top, a spiral is a moving circle, constantly expanding in scope. Viewed from the side, upward movement is evident, representing the addition of experience and understanding. As the upward circular movement of the spiral is repeated, potential energy is gradually added and increased. If we were to work on or study a given object, we would only have an elementary understanding, represented by the bottom of the spiral. But as our competence increased, our approach would be better represented by the top of the spiral. For example, most students in junior high read some Shakespeare. In senior high school they read more, and in college they may take courses devoted solely to Shakespeare. The literature under study remains the same, but as general knowledge and experience increases, students are able to read and interpret Shakespeare from new perspectives.

Designers must undergo the same developmental process. It is often said that it is important for design work to move beyond the commonplace to something new. This is a simple generalization. Human ability or capacity is essentially innate, so the creation of new ideas is largely dependent on the processes undergone and the capacity for expression that is added along the way. This process of idea development is an integral part of the European approach to education that I have added to my own spiral perspective. However, the spiral concept applies to Easterners and Westerners alike for it reflects the basic human instinct for learning, creation, and development. Moreover, it relates not only to individuals, but also to small groups and larger organizations, such as corporations.

The spiral does not extend outward or upward at a uniform p Becus  is o ient that uns olt egularn vals, the key to encouraging learning is to help identify points of change. At any point, development may be accelerated. Conceptually, a jump of three steps in one revolution of the spiral can occur along with an expansion of the radii. Moreover, by drawing on the energy of the upward moving spiral and encouraging the eression  beauy and the sudentwn energy, dicovery, and creation, the fundamental principles of education are fostered. I have attempted to facilitate and enhance this learning-creative process by providing opportunities in which I work with students not only in the usual laboratory settings but also in corporate settings, working on projects for clients. Initially, companies were reluctant to cooperate. However, as student designs were reviewed and highly appraised, firms became enthusiastic and invited students to give presentations. The learning-creative process is enhanced and magnified as students help resolve real issues and they gain firsthand experience in working with clients.

The experiment in university-business linkage has been successful at Tama Art University and will soon be introduced to other universities. However, many problems in the teaching of design remain. Faculty in Japan are granted life-long employment, similar to tenure in the United States, but without the rigorous process of peer review. With a comfortable work environment that does not require or demand serious creative work or self-assessment, most faculty lose their sense of intellectual and professional tension. The students, in turn, become easy going and carefree. Although design technologies are mastered, they are simply repeated and little creative work emerges. From this perspective, the state of design education in Japan is dismal.

## The evolution of design in modern Japan

Although I have concentrated on my personal experiences, I do not wish to neglect a broader pattern of evolution and the significant periods in contemporary Japanese history that bear a direct relation to design. The period from 1950 to 1954 was the "age of existence," a time when materials were simply insufficient. Beginning in the mid-1950s, however, Japan concentrated on increasing production of similarly styled products for the next decade. Everything from steel desks to automobiles to clothing looked the same, regardless of the manufacturer. It was the "age of mass-production" during which basic cost performance was incorporated and developed.

The following years brought concerns about lower costs, durability, and excellence in function, and a small consumer demand for differences in design and ambience began to grow. Japan had entered an "age of quality differentiation." The 1970s brought another shift. Consumers began setting their own criteria for acquiring products. People began to recognize the merits of various products and to make deliberate decisions for themselves rather than following general preferences. Someone might choose to purchase a bicycle not only for transportation but for exercise, as well. Someone else living in a beautiful home might decide to acquire not only an audio system but an extraordinary audio system. Not only did discrimination increase during these years but so did the purchasing power of consumers.

This trend continued through the 1980s, the "age of assertion." With economic and social progress, the majority of the population set aside feudalistic ways of suppressing their own wishes for the sake of the country" and began asserting themselves, seeking products—accessories—that fit their individual needs and desires.

## Future trends

The 1990s, no doubt, will be the "age of the spirit," for people are now beginning to develop individualistic life-styles. They seek enjoyment in creating environments pleasing to themselves. Furthermore, the scope of what individuals perceive as their environment is widening, from immediate living quarters to a broader milieu. As a result, small quantities of a great variety of products will be sought rather than standardized, mass-produced goods.

How is Japan responding to this future trend? Although technically refined robots are being developed, which are capable of new forms of manufacturing organization, large manufacturers are slow to modify their physical plants. They continue to rely on market research first learned in the United States at roughly the same time design was introduced to Japan. If research using similar techniques is used to survey the same markets about like products, then, naturally near uniform results will be obtained. If these results are conveyed to company planners and designers, then it is highly likely that similar products will be manufactured. Here too, the concept of the spiral, with its emphasis on change and adaptation, is relevant. Given the changing nature of the Japanese market and its growing preference for a wider range of products, the best manufacturers will respond to the increasingly personalized and therefore highly delineated markets and produce a great variety of goods. Short-sighted firms that fail to adapt will be in danger of going bankrupt

Until the present, designers have been closer to manufacturers than to consumers. Designers must alter this relationship by becoming closer to consumers and less dependent on the leadership and demands of manufacturers. If they are committed to lessening the designer-abetted pollution that menaces the world, to meeting the needs and desires of consumers, and to integrating design excellence into commercial and cultural life, then designers must develop interactive relationships with both users and producers.
