> 来源：Vision in Motion (László Moholy-Nagy)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Vision in Motion (László Moholy-Nagy)\Vision in Motion (László Moholy-Nagy).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 1. Technology

## Basic elements of workshop training

a. The use of hand tools and machines

b. Materials. An understanding of the physical properties of structural materials, such as wood, clay, plastics, metal, paper, and glass

c. Study of shapes, surfaces, and textures dStudy of volume, space, and motion. A training in the fundamental elements of design

When the Institute of Design was founded, music was one of the required classes—as essential as the other arts for a basic training. Here is the report of the teacher, David Dushkin, (1938): "The course is designed to promote the understanding and enjoyment of music by a three-fold participation: first, through musical crajts; second, through playing, and third, through analytic listening.

In order to make the first type of participation possible, a study is made in the workshop, of the tonal characteristics of common materials such as various types of wood and metal, etc., with the attempt to adapt them to musical uses by giving them definite pitch and providing resonance. In addition to these more common materials, others such as reeds, strings, tubes and skins are studied from the same point of view. A specific way in which these studies are realized, for example, is the formation of a diatonic scale of one octave, using any one of the tonal media mentioned above or others.

Problems involving a more developed study of instrumental design and the acoustical and musical properties of the more developed instruments have not yet been entered into, since a proper understanding of these involves considerably more background and time for investigation and analysis. It is possible that some students more interested in this phase of music can make further studies.

Second. the students have been loaned instruments, either which utilized knowledge previously acquired—for example, piano, violins, cellos—or instruments that could be mastered under the time limitations imposed by their other activities—for example, recorders and straight flutes.

In the analytic phase, the basic materials of music (rhythm, melody, scale and tonal characteristics, harmony and jorm) are discussed and illustrated. The emphasis here is analysis through hearing rather than through purely mental concepts. Hence, the ability to recognize rhythmic patterns, melodic and tonal characteristics and the elements of form and harmony should be the ability to recognize them when sounded rather than when seen on paper.

Almost everyone in the school is at present playing some kind of musical in-

## 2. Art

Basic elements of plastic representation Life drawing Color work Photography Mechanical drawing Lettering Modeling   
g. Literature (Group Poetry)
