> 来源：The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# PART TWO: 'A CLEVER AGITATOR'

CHAPTER 3

1830-1838

Wr year, from the te when he joned rave i 18.At frst hi work, aey scholarly and not too demanding, left him opportunity to develop his social life. But crisis.

On the accession of William IV in 1830, a new Record Commission was appointed, consisting of 25 members, headed, as before, by the Archbishop of Canterbury. It included some historians and scholars, but also politicians, peers, a bishop and two judges. Cole thought it too large a group. At least, so he said in retrospect. 'Its members were numerous. The first principle for securing good administration by concentrated responsibility had not then been recognized as necessary to effective government, although Jeremy Bentham had been preaching the doctrine of "single-seated responsibility" for years.'1 Single-seated responsibility - the allocation of administrative authority to identifable, accountable individuals, rather than to fluctating boards and committees  was to become Cole's favourite Benthamite doctrine, which he propounded relentlessly. It was from his experience of the Record Commission that he learned its importance.

The new commission did include some reformers. One was Edward Protheroe, jun., MP, who was to become an ally of Cole. More significant, initially, was the new chairman of the commission, Henry Brougham, the famous reforming lawyer, recently appointed Lord Chancellor. At the first meeting of the board of the new commission, an attempt was made to re-appoint John Caley as secretary, but Brougham pushed through the appointment of his own nominee, Charles Purton Cooper. Cooper was a barrister of about 4o, with a busy practice at the Chancery Bar; an enthusiast for legal reform, and a writer of pamphlets. It was through his writing that he had met Brougham, who had introduced him into the circle at Holland House. Cooper had no professional knowledge of archives, but regarded this as an advantage. He claimed: 'I believe it was the circumstance that I did not possess a knowledge of the ancient records that induced the board to force upon me (for Lord Brougham forced upon me) the office of secretary rather than a record man; I was appointed for the purpose of checking the zeal of those lovers of ancient records.'2 He also wrote that 'the condition on which I accepted the office of Secretary was, that its duties should be made in all respects secondary and subordinate to my professional avocations'.3 Notwithstanding this detached attitude, Cooper began by trying to make reforms. He was scandalized by the amounts of money spent by the commission, and at the first opportunity brought all its publications to a stop, and arranged to sell off old stock. Unwanted volumes were sold by weight at $_ { 4 } d .$ a pound, and the book collector, Sir Thomas Phillips, bought two hackney coaches full.4

Cooper was soon to become Cole's new master. After nine years of 'servitude' working as a clerk to Palgrave, Cole was restless. While Palgrave received at least £1,ooo a year (£5o,ooo at present rates),5 Cole was still being paid £125 a year, though he was working as an editor rather than as a mere transcriber. His horizons had widened, for away from the office he moved easily among aristocratic and radical young Members of Parliament and he had the friendship of John Stuart Mill and Thomas Love Peacock. Palgrave, for all his high income, would not pay him more in his present post.6 On 16 April 1832, Thomas Hardy, who was collating the Parliamentary Rolls for the board, and was by now a friend of Cole's, suggested to Cole that he might like to work with him at the Tower. The next day they called on Cooper (Cole meeting him for the first time), who took him on as a clerk under the Record Commission at a salary of £ 1 5o. Cole wrote that 'Mr Palgrave did not half like my leaving him under such circumstances',7 for Cole was Palgrave's most experienced clerk.8

Thomas Hardy had disliked Palgrave since the early 182os, when, as one of his clerks, he had been in his power. Now they quarrelled seriously over the way Palgrave interfered with Hardy's work. At the end of the week in which Cole gained his promotion, he was present at the Tower during an altercation between Palgrave and Hardy that boiled over into fisticuffs. Palgrave, Cole recorded, 'got a thump of the face for his pains'. Palgrave's position under the commission, as an almost independent editor, was insecure under the new regime, for Cooper was trying to dislodge him. In June a committee was appointed to try to curb Palgrave's excesses, but it was made up of his friends, and had little effect.10 Cole continued to be wary of Sir Francis  who was knighted in 1832 - and gave vent to his antagonism in his diary. 11

Cole's new master, Cooper, found himself 'so vigorously opposed by five or six of the Commissioners that he repeatedly stated his determination either to perform his duty or to resign his situation' 12 In fact, he did not resign. For the commission chiefly consisted (apart from Cooper's few opponents) of busy people who had no time or energy for it, and Cooper took advantage of their lack of interest to do what he thought fit. He did his best to control 'those lovers of ancient records', and became more and more high-handed in his treatment of the commission's staff.

Cole, having been taken on by the commission, began to work at the secretary's chambers on the  February 1833, transcribing a parliamentary roll. Cooper's chambers were in New Boswell Court, just north of Theobald's Road, and he had had them nicely fitted up at the expense of the commission, calling the work 'repairs'.13 Later in February, Cole's cousin Richard Bond left Christ's Hospital, and joined Cole in his work. When the weather became a little warmer in the middle of March, they were able to begin work at the King's Mews, a storehouse that had previously been 'the stables and riding-school of Carlton-house, in which the Princess Charlotte used to delight herself with horse exercise'. Cole described this 'huge barn' 'the inside of this building presents a series of dark alleys  the sides of which are faced with Records ri e thirty  .I a eakehi. Ter hae terribly affected by damp and neglect: 'some were in a state of inseparable adhesion to the stone walls . . . many were in the last stages of putrefaction ... others were so cgulate together that they could not bencoileSir seven perfec ske rat weeWi asway vtanhrrih r gais e uh ,rC set about putting these records in order.15

Cooper had told Cole that in addition to his salary, now £ 5o a year, he would be able to earn another £15o by extra work, writing reports for the agenda of the board. 16 Cole waited a few weeks before asking for a letter from the board formalising his employment. He also suggested to the secretary that as he was doing the work  an editor, he ught to be paid as such. Thismae Cooer xcngly wroth' 18 Although Cole had escaped from Palgrave, he did not find Cooper an easy person to work for, especially since Cooper seemed disinclined to provide Cole with any definite statement of his terms and conditions of work. From now on, Cole was in an increasingly bitter struggle with Cooper. This must have been a formative experience, which caused him to discover and develop the tough side of his character that was to make him such a formidable controversialist and organiser. It is therefore worth following in some detail what might otherwise be dismissed as a tiresome office quarrel.

Cole made an alliance with the reforming commissioner, Edward Protheroe. Soon after his appointment to the Record Commission, Protheroe had a period of illness, but by April 1833, having been elected MP for Halifax, he was back in London and at his parliamentary duties. Throughout May, he and Cole met almost daily. Cole helped Protheroe with reports for the board, and Protheroe advised Cole to tone down the letters of complaint that he was sending to Cooper. Cole discussed his troubles with the Hardy brothers constantly, as well as with Peacock, Grant, Elliott and Chadwick. From Mill in particular he derived 'sympathy and counsel'. 19 In thus involving others in his troubles Cole was beginning to exercise his talents as a networker and agitator.

On 1 May 1833 Cole, while keeping his own office at the King's Mews, went to work in the Augmentation Office, Westminster, which contained the records of the Court of Augmentation, set up by Henry VII at the time of the dissolution of the monasteries to handle his augmented revenue, and amalgamated with the Court of Exchequer in 1554. This store, containing 'extremely important and valuable' records, 20 was in a house near the south-west corner of Westminster Hall, and overlooked New Palace Yard. Next to it was Bellamy's Chop House, which politicians and lawyers treated as a club. The kitchen fires, where the famous steaks, chops and pork pies were cooked, were a constant worry to successive Record Commissions, but nothing was done. Though the storehouse was 'sufficiently airy and spacious', no one slept there and the doors only had 'common locks'.21 Protheroe wrote a report for the board on 22 June 1833:

These rooms had long been in a filthy state; it is possible that when the operation of cleansing the Records commenced, the rooms may have been so encumbered as to render order and neatness scarcely attainable; but it has long been unnecessary to leave the Records on the floor or to permit the workmen to tread them under foot when engaged in picking out those which might merit repair; and it was slovenly to leave heaps of dirt in the chimnies [sic], to be blown over the bound books and cleaned Records every time the doors were opened.22

Despite these dismal conditions, Cooper would not allow Cole to employ a cleaner.

Out of office hours, Cole was writing reports for Cooper that were printed in the agenda of the board, but by June he realised that Cooper was not going to pay him for this extra work. With the help of Protheroe, he wrote to him on 28 June. He reminded him of his promise, and also asked again what were his exact conditions of employment, and whether he was employed by Cooper personally, or by the commission. Cooper replied the next day, with notable insouciance.

You were lately a clerk of Sir Francis Palgrave, at a salary, as well as I recollect, of I 25l. a year. You now fll a similar situation under the Secretary, but your salary has been raised to I 5ol. per annum. What is the precise authority that the Secretary may possess over you, and the other clerks in a similar situation, I will not pretend to determine, having never given the subject a thought, nor do I apprehend circumstances are likely to arise that will render a decision of this question necessary; and if it be of any importance to you, permit me to observe, you should have mentioned it at the time when I engaged you.23

With the help of Mill and Protheroe, Cole wrote several more letters to Cooper, always with no satisfactory result. Supported by his friends and feeling that he was in the right, he began to collect this correspondence and turn it into a pamphlet entitled Record Commission. A letter addressed to the Right Honourable the Speaker of the House of Commons, as chairman of the Commission on Public Records, on the conduct of C. Purton Cooper . . . and the general management of the Commission, which he published after matters came to a head in December 1835.

Meanwhile, he kept Charles Buller up to date with his troubles,24 and had meetings with Thomas Hardy at the Tower to discuss the behaviour of 'that outrageous jobber Cooper'.25 He was asked by the radical MP, Henry Warburton (nicknamed 'Philosopher Warburton'), to tell him of the developing turmoil in the record service, and thereore 'rode into Town in his carriage or the purpose o communicating with him upon the Record Commission'.26

The increasingly tense situation was unexpectedly defused by Cooper, perhaps because he was well aware of Cole's friendships among the young radicals in Parliament. On 16 August, he asked Cole to call on him, and, as Cole later said, 'to my very great surprise, he told me he thought it was for the good of the public that I should make at least 3ool. a year; that although the board had determined I should make only I 5ol., he was satisfied that the interest of the public required that I should make at least 3ool. a year'.27 Although Cooper thus offered Cole more money, he still did not clarify his terms and conditions, and Cole's opinion (recorded in his diary entry for that day) was that Cooper had 'tried to bamboozle me with offers of increased salary'. In another conversation three weeks later, Cooper 'renewed in substance the previous conversation only tincturing it with more examples of selfish lying & vanity'. 28

In early September Cooper went to Bognor, and, with Parliament in recess, the early autumn was a quiet time for Cole. He allowed himself a few jaunts, such as the visit he made with Grant to see the steam boats intended for the Ganges that were beig built at Maudsleys'yard. In the evenings he was transcribing an early thirt-u ol  oe and e tok it wi him vs T e was courting his first cousin Marian Bond. She was governess to three little girls called Maitland, who lived at Loughton Hall, not far from Epping. Though the Maitlands were an established 'county' family, providing magistrates and high sheriff for the locality, Cole was not impressed by the little girls' father, whom he described as 'a hasty bluff good humoured, not very cultivated or informed person. A modern specimen of antient John Bull, hating the French, Up for the King and so forth'.29 Marian brought her charges to see her mother and Henry, and they all 'passed the day very blithesomely & happily. The children enjoyed themselves with glorious boisterousness'.30

On 21 October Protheroe came back from the country, and he and Cole resumed their almost daily meetings. Protheroe had had his own rows with Cooper  notably about a report that he had written but Cooper had changed. It was Protheroe who discovered that Cooper's chambers had been done up at the commission's expense, and that he did not keep proper accounts. He became 'very inveterate against the Sec[retar]y threatening to cane him & calling him a "Beast". 31 Cooper was well aware of Protheroe's antipathy, and wrote to one of the commissioners a couple of years later: 'Mr P's interference has been productive of great mischief and [departments] which had begun to assume a form of order are again involved in the greatest confusion. Some remedy must be found for this or it will be useless to attempt to continue successfully the operations of the Commission.'32

At the end of October Cooper wrote Cole 'an extremely polite letter'33 and, when Cole called on him on 2 November, he 'received me with great politeness and deference'. Four days later he 'strived to be humourous and civil'. It may have been to disarm Cole's opposition that Cooper put him in charge of the Augmentation Office in the middle of the month. The board was anxious not to increase the salaries of the junior staff, and Cooper reassured Protheroe on this point: 'You are quite wrong in supposing that I have increased Mr. Cole's salary, or given him any emolument inconsistent with what passed at the Board. Sir Robert Inglis and the other members of that Board objected only to an increase of salary, but not to any additional emolument arising out of transcribing done out of office-hours.

Although Cole distrusted Cooper, his prospects seemed to have improved. Perhaps that was why, after a 'boisterously merry' and 'very jovial' Christmas with his cousins at Epping, Henry married Marian at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 28 December 1833. Henry's preparations for the wedding, apart from going to hear the banns read, consisted of buying a 'jug for Toast & Water I 6'. The marriage was kept a close secret. Marian's sister Laura chaperoned her to London, but they did not reveal the event even to Lindsay, who came to see them in the evening. Marian went back to the Maitlands, presumably concealing the marriage because she wanted to keep her job for a while.

She eventually came to live with Henry at the end of March, as posts were re-allocated in the record service. On 27 March John Caley, still keeper of the records at the Chapter House, Westminster, died, and Palgrave, whose edition of Parliamentary writs now came to an end, took responsibility for the Chapter House at a salary of £ I,ooo, the amount he had previously received as a sub-commissioner. Cole was now officially appointed as temporary keeper at the Augmentation Office. He told Lindsay that the new post 'probably . . . will lead to more important results and be the means of conducting a better Salary to me. The post happens to be one which is not worth making a job of & thus it is likely I shall have no opponent. I have the keys in my possession & that is much & I do not intend to relinquish them without strugglin

Cole's work was now arranging and cataloguing the collections of records at both the Kings Mews and the Augmentation Office. He was also editing one of the Record Commission's folio volumes entitled Selections from the Miscellaneous Records of the Office of the King's Remembrancer of the Exchequer, but doing it after office hours and being paid as a mere transcriber or clerk, rather than as an editor. Cooper told him not to mention 'editorship' when he promised to pay him £1oo for extra work, 36 while Cole felt justified in calling himself a sub-commissioner. This title was very important to the status and self-esteem of the officers of the Record Commission: to be a clerk was to be on the lowest rung of the career ladder. Both Hardy and Cole had been clerks when they began their work, but after so many years of experience in transcribing and then editing they both considered themselves on a par with Sir Francis. Cole's new authority allowed him to reduce the fee to see a record to 8s. 8d. instead of the £3. 3s. od. that had been charged by Caley, and he allowed a free search of the indexes.37 Caley's library was sold by Hodgsons in July in a nine-day sale. Cole went to watch the indexes of the Augmentation Office sold. They were not bought by the Record Commission, but went to Sir Thomas Phillips for £230.

Cooper continued to be friendly, and encouraged Cole to write a pamphlet calling for reform of the exchequer records. Cole produced and distributed this briskly in May.38 Here he first hit his form as a controversialist. Though the pamphlet had a bafingly ironical title,3 the text was boldly, even foridly, polemical. In ncouraig Cole in pamphleteering, Cooper was helping his young colleague to sharpen a weapon that Cole would soon use against him.

In late July, Henry and Marian made a delayed wedding journey to Cornwall. Cole may have intended to follow in the footsteps of John Mill, whose journal of a walking tour in Cornwall he read before setting out.40 Henry and Marian travelled by coach (outside) to Portsmouth and by steamer to Plymouth. They toured the coast, covering about to miles a day mainly on foot, sometimes getting a lift in a cart. The weather was good and only one day was spoilt by rain. They came back from St Ives by steamer to Bristol, and then by coach to London. They reached home on 1 September, having spent in total £26. 3s. 1d. Apart from this holiday, they visited their relations at Epping, and made Sunday expeditions with members of the philosophic radical circle - Grant, Elliott and Chadwick. Also in this circle were Samuel and William Hickson, with whose parents Henry and Marian spent 12-14 October at their home at Fairseat, near Sevenoaks in Kent. Cole found the family 'particularly remarkable for their great simplicity and their benevolence'.41 They were radicals and shoe manufacturers, and the sons gave up their business to follow political and reforming careers. William, in particular, was a friend of Henry's, and shared his interest in music and education.

L n e o lhT 16 October 1834. Marian and Henry were sitting in their chambers in Adelphi after inner when seve a reat hn vey rs Per Paul the workmen in the record service, came to fetch Cole as the Houses of Parliament were on fire. The House of Lords had caught alight and the fire had taken hold with alarming speed. A south wind was blowing the flames towards Westminster Hall and the Augmentation Office. When Cole arrived, Protheroe was already there. He had happened to be passing very soon after the fire began, and he had broken down the office door and was throwing the records out of the windows. Soldiers and policemen helped carry them over the road to the parish church of St Margaret's. Luckily at about 8 o'clock the wind changed to the west, and the fire, though it destroyed the House of Commons, did not reach the record repositories. Some of the records, however, were inevitably trampled underfoot and soaked with water, which was knee deep in the street. On the morning after the fire, Cole was at the church before eight, putting the records into sacks and arranging for them to be dried before taking them back across the road to the office.

The upheaval caused by the fire gave Cole the chance to re-organise the office. He sorted the records chronologically, and had presses made to hold them. Caley's indexes having been sold, Cole had to make new ones. For the extra work that he did during 1834, Cole sent in a bill for £220, which, with his salary of £ 1 50 brought him up to $\mathscr { L } _ { 3 } 7 0 , \mathscr { L } _ { 7 0 }$ more than Cooper had promised him. However, this sum was paid, and later the accounts were audited without questions being asked. Cole's total income for that year was £424. 13s. 1d. (say, £21,ooo in today's terms), and he was able to invest $\mathscr { L } _ { 5 0 }$ on the Stock Exchange through his cousin Samuel Bilke. The extra income came from fees at the Augmentation Office (at 8s. 8d. a document), and small sums from his articles in magazines and newspapers. He was still writing reviews of plays, exhibitions and operas, many of which appeared in The Examiner. He always praised the music of Marielli, an accomplished composer of drawing-room songs, for she was his friend Mrs Kingston, whose husband had given him singing lessons.

Henry, Marian, Lindsay and Laura, with Mrs Bond, spent Christmas 1834 with the Webbs at Epping. With Charlotte they saw the New Year in at a dance given by the Hicksons. Outside the family circle, Cole was consolidating his friendships with the philosophic radicals, and at this time he also got to know Thomas Carlyle. He and Marian were invited to tea in the evenings at the Carlyles' house in Chelsea. Mrs Carlyle called them 'niceish talkative people',42 and she was grateful to Marian for helping her to find a servant.43

After a busy first half-year in 1835, Cole sent in an enormous bill in August, totalling nearly £ 5oo for the extra work he had done, partly as a result of the fire and partly to provide indexes to the random records bound up by Caley, besides the usual evening work on individual records. This caused relations with Cooper to deteriorate again. Cooper did not deign to answer himself, but had his clerk, George Smith, write to Cole. 'I return you the account, which I have shown to Mr. Cooper, who was very angry with it. He says the amount claimed by you for work during extra hours, is more than double what he intimated you could receive, and that it would make up your emoluments higher than any other in the employ of the board, except Sir F. Palgrave, which, he says is quite out of the question.' Cole replied with a polite letter, meekly speaking of his feelings of delicacy in mentioning his remuneration and continuing, 'I shall be happy to have any conversation with you, and to be corrected in any of my errors, if you will allow me to speak openly on the subject'.44 Cooper tetchily answered: 'Last year your total remuneration was about 3ool., and I never dreamt of its exceeding that sum in the present year. . . . The claim you have made I consider as putting an end to any arrangement that may have been come to as to your spare time, which you will consider your own until the matter can be brought before the board.'45

Cole consulted Protheroe, who reassured him that the board already knew about his extra work and approved of his being paid for it. Cole's resolve to stand up to Cooper was strengthened by the trouble that Thomas Hardy was also having with him. After many years working at the Tower Record Office and as a Record Commission editor, Hardy considered himself a sub-commissioner, and indeed Cooper had called him by this title frequently, both in conversation and in writing.46 Thus encouraged, Hardy, who was editing the Close Rolls, asked to be paid extra for the preface. When this was denied, he declined to hand it over, and Cooper thereupon halted work on all projects, 'every one of them, even those on the eve of completion'.47 Hardy did not take this treatment lying down, and wrote 'a rather taunting letter'.48 Then his younger brother William was rude to Cooper. Finally Cooper ended Thomas's editorial employment on 24 August 1835, saying that he himself 'was the editor appointed by the Board, and I [Hardy} was his mere employee'.49 Hardy thought Cooper had no right to dismiss him without the sanction of the board.

In this worsening situation, Cole again wrote to Cooper on 9 November to ask when a board was to be held which would discuss his fees. Two days later Cooper replied:

If I recollect right, I have more than once informed you that, as the Board in 183 2 had refused to allow you any remuneration beyond 1 ol. a year, all that you have received beyond that has been paid on my individual responsibility, not only without the sanction of the Board, but in contravention of its order. I decline to incur this responsibility any longer, and I make bold to state that your conduct has been such that you cannot be surprised at my determination.50

Cooper was trying to imply here that he had been personally favouring Cole, and had now withdrawn his favours; but he only succeeded in making the damaging statement that as secretary to the commission he had acted against its instructions. o ar which acknowledged the arrangement that Cooper now tried to disown. Protheroe trie to protect Cole and Thomas Hardy.As he wrote to one of the sub-comissione  ths tim ih re to Mrol  m o t wa wi jeal undeserved position'.52

Cole's diaries for 1835 and 1836 are missing, presumed destroyed either by Cole or his family. As the disputes in the record service became more heated, Cole doubtlerecordedlngs that were not thought sitable or iscosure t psy. Although everything in Cole's life conveys an atmosphere of unruffled geniality up to about 1833, he was now fghting with ever increasing determination, and even anger. In early December 183 5, in the office, he was shown the preface to a record publication, written by one of his junior colleagues, Frederick Devon. Here Devon praised

Cooper, and when Cole read this the years of frustration that he had suffered caused him to lose his head and let fly with a most ill-judged outburst. Several other people were in the room and one of them bore tales to Cooper, who summoned Devon to verify the story, and then seized his opportunity to dismiss Cole.53

Cole fought back. After taking counsel's opinion, he wrote to Cooper on7 December, declining to accept dismissal, and disclosing that he had already prepared an attack of his own upon Cooper, in his pamphlet, A letter to the Speaker, which wa r  t.He ro gai ollg y,pg tha had exceeded his powers, to which Cooper replied: 'The principal and immediate cause of my dismissing you was disparaging language used by you in speaking of the Board, and grossly insulting and slanderous words spoken of myself.'55 Cole's answer, on 14 December, while demanding chapter and verse from Cooper, was evasive about his own contribution to the quarrel:

I conceive, though greatly provoked by your unjustifiable conduct towards me, and your general management of the Commission, by which you have seriously affected both public and private interests, I have never used languageunjust or unbecoming: and now, Sir, after that condemnation which you have taken upon yourself to pass upon me, I again request to know the charge upon which you assume the right to condemn me, the precise language attributed to me, the names of the witness or witnesses, and the time and place of the alleged occurrence.56

Finally Cooper wrote to him enclosing a letter that he had persuaded Devon to write, ebleursThir, il isc e grounds upon which I have dismissed you'.58

Cole was not allowed an interview with the board, and when it met on 18 December, it found against him. It was a large meeting, and many of those present did not know what was going on. They concluded that Cole and Hardy were not employed directly by the board and therefore could not be sub-commissioners. A committee was appointed to discuss their claims for fees. The board also 'Ordered that in future the engagement of all persons employed in the service of the Board shall as far as possible be defined in writing specifying the nature of the service and terms of remuneration'.59 Perhaps encouraged by this attempt to regularise Cooper's management of the staff, Protheroe moved to have Cole appointed a sub-commissioner and for him to continue his work at the Augmentation Office, but the board would have none of it. As Protheroe said later, 'The question of Mr Cooper's authority seems alone to have been discussed by the board. At least, the contents of the memorials affecting the characters and livelihoods of the cleverest and most efficient gentlemen in our service did not undergo that attention, consideration and discussion which I thought and contended they deserved'.6" The young clerks who were connected with Cole and Hardy were also dismissed. Cole's cousins Edward and Richard Bond, together with William Hardy, all lost their jobs.

A committee to settle the fees met on 2 1 December 183 5, when Cole and Hardy were present, as were Cooper and his clerk. Cole was given his arrears of salary and a further £127. 13s. od. to make it up to £300o for the period that he had worked under Cooper. He was also given 8ogns for the extra work he had done after the fire at the Houses of Parliament. Hardy's claim was sympathetically received but not settled.

Cole later recorded that he 'received a message from Lord Brougham, through Mr. Protheroe, telling me that the Commissioners would consider my complaint favourably at a future time if I would only be quiet'. 61 But he would not be quiet. As soon as he was dismissed, he distributed his pamphlet and published another, A second letter . . . to the Speaker of the House of Commons . .. on the conduct of C. Purton Cooper . . ., in which he said:

Mr. Cooper well knew how entirely I condemned his mismanagement of the Commission from the day it was taken into his hands . . .. He knew that a parliamentary inquiry was suspended over his proceedings; - he knew the danger of my evidence; - he knew, too well, the humiliation he had undergone in his endeavours to compromise and silence my disapprobation of his proceedings; - he knew that I would not suppress my testimony, and therefore sought to damage its character by a manoeuvre of dismissal.62

Cole's pamphlets were defiant, cocksure productions. He had to payor them himself, and could ill afford it.

He was now out of work, with no resources to tide him over this hard time. He may have been free to speak his mind about the iniquities of the commission but that brought in no salary. His chances of being re-employed were slender, given his reputation and his publications. To help out he took in Edwin Chadwick as a lodger in his house in Notting Hill Square (now Campden Hill Square) and borrowed money from him. Chadwick was now secretary to the Poor Law Commissioners and, an ardent and rigid reformer, was hard at work implementing the Poor Law Act of $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 \ : 3 4$ Cole also borrowed from Horace Grant, from his father and from Lindsay. He earned small sums from articles about the Record Commission in the Law Magazine and the Penny Magazine.

John Mill, lending Cole £roo, spoke of 'the honorable & public spirited course' that he had taken. In the tangleof disputes, Cole was on the whole in the right. But what stands out is his sheer, unappeasable persistence. It might now seem that he had fought his battle to a bitter defeat. But he would not give in. He resolved to escalate the fight to the utmost, taking on the entire Record Commission. What had started as a dispute about personal grievances at work now modulated into a programme to reform a public institution.

## \* \*\*\*

Cole secured the support of Charles Buller, who, on 18 February 1836, moved for a select committee of the House of Commons, to inquire into the Record Commission. This was Buller's first important speech, and he told the House of the excesses of the commission in such a way that the members laughed at almost every sentence. He told them of the waste of money, and of the neglect of the records and of the mismanagement  thef.Oe  the oll  the ission a bee t pu itself and its new members by having leaflets printed in foreign languages and sending them all over Europe. He held up a pamphlet in which the secretary was 'immortalized' as 'Viro illustri, excellantissimo, clarissimo, doctissimo C.P. Coopero equiti Ango This brought Roars of laughter' As Charles Greville put it after Buller's death 12 years later, 'by universal acknowledgement he was an admirable speaker, full of matter, lucid, never dull, and generally very amusing. His greatest speeches were on dry and serious subjects, such as colonisation, emigration, or records, none of which became heavy or uninteresting in his hands'.65 A contemporary wrote in 1837: 'His face is like his speaking in Parliament; almost too lively and gay to correspond with our general notions as to the proper degree of dulness which ought to belong to a modern member of the Commons.'66 Buller's charm and grasp of the facts, almost certainly supplied by Cole, did the trick and the House granted him the committee without a division.

At this period the select committee was the government's device to keep the radicals quiet. A committee could easily be granted; and the process of gathering evidence and preparing a report (which could then be quietly buried) kept the complainants busy. The members of the committee examining the Record Commission were all radicals with two exceptions, these being Sir Robert Inglis, a die-hard Tory and a Member for Oxford University, and Charles Williams Wynn, a moderate conservative who sat for Montgomeryshire. They were both members of the Record Commission. Williams Wynn was a Welshman, a scholar and the first president of the Asiatic Society. Cole said he was 'very sore at the fun which Mr Buller had made of the Commission's proceedings'. And no wonder, as Buller had singled him out to mock his title in Portuguese: 'O muito nobre Carlos Watkins Williams Wynn'.67 The other members of the committee were Benjamin Hawes, Thomas Spring Rice, Charles Villiers, Thomas Wyse, John Jervis, Philip Pusey, Sir Matthew Ridley, Sir Charles Lemon, Sergeant Henry Goulburn, Sir William Molesworth, Sir George Clerk and Dr Bowring.

The chairman, Mr. Buller, showed an amount of patience, ability, and diligence which raised him at once into political importance.' At each sitting of the committee, Cole was at Charles Buller's side.68 Buller relied on him and called him 'the attorney for the prosecution'.69 Cole coached the favourable witnesses and suggested who should be called. From the Record Commission staff, Frederick Devon, who had denounced him to Cooper, was not called at all; nor was W. H. Black, who did not like Cole. Few other supporters of the commission were accorded a chance to give evidence.

The committee met first in March and then intermittently during the summer until July. Often the sessions had to be very short, as members were sitting on other select committees that were in progress at the same time, in particular that on arts and manufactures, and that on the condition, management and affairs of the British Museum. Benjamin Hawes and Sir Robert Hawes were on the British Museum and the records committees and were needed at both. Cole pointed out that this led to members 'fluttering about' between committees, instead of concentrating on one.70 Sir William Molesworth fellill early in the summer and hardly attended at all.

The report was adopted on 6 August. It was largely taken up with a history of the different Record Commissions and their shortcomings. As an afterthought it contained the recommendations that one might expect: a demand for a single building to house all the records, a smaller commission, and one person with a small staff to manage it. Almost the only sensible achievement of the commission had been in 1833, when it proposed the building of a Record Office on the Rolls Estate in Chancery Lane, the site on which a unified depository was eventually built.

Cole's part in the proceedings of the committee and in the drafting of the report was well known. In reviewing the report, The Age, a stoutly Tory Sunday newspaper, published a personal attack on him.

The first person mentioned in the margin of the report is a Mr Cole, who ought to be a gentleman of considerable judgement, ability, and weight of character; for the importance of his evidence is such that he is mentioned no less than thirty-three times. . . . But here is Mr Cole, or, as he modestly writes himself 'Henry Cole Esquire' . . . Mr Cole, the discharged clerk of the Secretary of the Commission, is one of the sons of a respectable coal-dealer; in what is called 'a small way'. We should not mention this diamond's parent, but for his son's impudence, or ignorance. . . . Do you stand behind Buller's chair, and prompt him? Et tu Brute! Thou art indeed a black diamond of the first water. . . . Be assured, Sir, that the vain, expensive, and rag-begetting employ of reducing your superiors to your own poor level willnot serve your purposes.71

The Gentleman's Magazine published a review of the report, taking the side of the commission, and urging readers not to 'depend upon the edition of the Report recently published by Ridgway, as a pamphlet, with notes. Those notes are evident emanation from the same, not spirit, but spite, which has before shown itself in other quarters'.72 This is an attack on Cole, who, pamphleteering ever more energetically, had put out his own 'Report', which looked at first sight just like an official publication, but to which he had added many footnotes to further his attacks on Cooper.73 Cole summed up his campaigning in a fierce article ("written with much personal feeling')74 in Fraser's Magazine in February 1837.75

An interesting side issue, relating to the conduct of select committees, evoked yet another pamphlet from Cole. A witness's evidence before a select committee was taken down by a shorthand writer, and then sent to the witness to be corrected before it was printed. Thus it was possible for a witness to alter his answers to give a better slant to his replies. Cole, with his usual thoroughness, checked the answers that had been given and found that Cooper was the worst offender, rewriting not only his answers but the questions put to him as well. So Cole composed and distributed anonymously Remarks on Certain Evils to which the Printed Evidence taken by the Committees of the House of Commons is at present subject, with illustrations furnished by the late inquiry into the Record Commission (1836). This pamphlet caused a stir, and Sir Robert Peel spoke about it in the House of Commons. The way of taking and printing evidence at select committes was changed as a result.76

Cooper joined in the pamphlet war, with a long compilation of 1285 imaginary questions and answers, printed as if they were part of theofficial papers of the commite. In the preac e state that they 'were ram in conormiy with the uo   Lr Baero Rul  c management of Select Committees & preparation of Reports (1837). These efforts could not, however, redeem his public reputation. The press turned against him and even The Age attacked him in a piece of doggerel verse,8 which must have cheered Cole up because he preserved it in his press cuttings book. The commissioners themselves embarked on pamphleteering. They published anonymously as a pamphlet their Observations on the record report, and this gave Buller the chance to tease Mr

Will speeches on 24 February 1837.

The winter of 18367 was an exceptionally hard one with snow on the ground for most of January. There was a bad epidemic of influenza and many of Cole's friends caught it, though he did not. He was busy drafting a bill to establish a General Record Office, and his consultations with Charles Buller and the others had to take pa t heeo wo wereBulJo Jd Jo Mill cumbed. Cole also consulted Edwin Chadwick and Tom Hardy. The final draft was not settled until after Charles Buller had got the House of Commons's permission to bring in the bill. He introduced it for itsfrst reading in ebruary, with the government's backing.

The plotters often met at the Reform Club, which had just been founded to be a meeting place for radicals and Whigs. The prime movers, Sir William Molesworth and Joseph Hume, succeeded in persuading a good number of Whig Members of Parliament to join. Molesworth had high hopes that the club would help to bring about the hoped-for realignment in British politics. 'The effect will be to break up the Whig party by joining the best of them to the radicals, and the club will be the political centre of Europe, and augment our power immensely.'79 The club opened in May 1836, in an eighteenth-century house in Pall Mall altered by George Basevi, with over 200 MPs and 1,ooo ordinary members. Despite his poverty, Cole was one of the founding members and paid the annual subscription of £5 os. od. The members included almost all the MPs who helped Cole, but curiously Charles Buller did not join, though his brother Arthur did. Protheroe joined in 1842. Cole remained a member until that year, and thus enjoyed, if only briefly, the amenities of the Italianate palace, opened in 1841, which Sir Charles Barry designed as a new clubhouse in Pall Mall.

After the first reading of Buller's bill, the government decided to bring in its own Records Bill. Meanwhile, in March 1837, Lord John Russell, the Home Secretary, persuaded the Master of the Rolls, Lord Langdale, to take temporary responsibility for the records. This was a stroke of good fortune for Cole, because the recently ennobled Lord Langdale was Henry Bickersteth, a philosophic radical, and well known to Bentham, James Mill, Grote, Place and other reformers. Originally trained as a doctor (and son of the Bickersteth who wrote on contraception), he changed to the Bar, and rose to become Master of the Rolls and Lord Langdale in January 1836. James Mill commended Cole to Langdale, and on 3o March Buller reported to Cole that Langdale meant to take him and Thomas Hardy on to the staff of the new record establishment he had in mind. Cole was very anxious to get back into the public record service, but short as he was of money, he would never accept a post if it meant apologising to Cooper.

To keep up the pressure for reform, both of the public records and in other areas, Cole and his friends started a weekly newspaper, The Guide. 'The aim of the Guide will be to advocate the interests of the Many, and to promote the steady and rapid progress of those Reforms in our Institutions which all but the bigotted [sic] and interested Few are determined on effecting'.80 As editor and one of the registered proprietors, Cole had to make himself an expert on all the 'dismal and frivolous formalities of obtaining sureties against libel, and for payment of stamp duties, [and] with all the intricate mysteries of the rights and privileges of newspapers, divided between the Treasury, the Stamp Office, and the Post Office'.81 The arrangements completed, the first issue appeared on 22 April. There were immediate complaints that it was too small, even though it claimed to be, at 3d., the cheapest weekly paper ever printed. It was distinguished by containing Peacock's 'Paper Money Lyrics', which he had written at the time of the financial panic of 1825, and which he allowed Cole to print for the first time. The paper, despite Cole's working all night to get it out on the streets on time, was a failure, lasting only for nine weeks before being sold off to a paper maker. Cole's need for money was now urgent, and Horace Grant offered to lend him £5o. To add to his worries, Marian was expecting their first child, who was a boy, born just as The Guide was failing. Henry was a delighted father, spending whole evenings nursing the child. 'In the Evening about little else than nursing Baby.'82 He was christened Downer Peacock: Downer after the rich uncle, and Peacock ambiguously after Thomas or William.

Help was at hand, for in July Lord Langdale arranged with the board of the Record Commission for Cole and Thomas Hardy to be given some work. He summoned Cole to see him on I 2 August and told him that he was 'authorized to engage me to arrange the Records of the Exchequer of Pleas', a task that Cole began on I 5 August. The older records are deposited in the only remaining portions of the Old Whitehall Palace, converted into a dwelling House wh: was inhabited by Oliver Cromwell. Went there & looked over the work proposed to me.' The house stood in Whitehall Yard, an open space beside the elm trees of the Privy Garden, with a distant view of St Paul's Cathedral beyond the Thames.

In August, Marian, Henry and the baby spent a week's holiday at Greenhithe, taking Mrs Paul with them as nursemaid and travelling down the Thames by the steamers Vesper and Topaz.83 On their return, Cole, enjoying the security of a permanent post again, was bubbling with ideas for new journalistic projects (further discussed in chapter 5). He tried to start an educational newspaper, the Portfolio of Public Instruction; contemplated publishing a penny paper, compiled from other newspapers and journals; and in January 1838 took over as editor of the British Ladies Newspaper.

The Record Bill, however, was at a standstill. The government had undertaken to bring in its own bill and Buller had stood down. In May, a bill was drafted with the advice of Lord Langdale, but, after the death of William IV on 2o June, when the current Record Commission lapsed, the bill languished too. In October Thomas Hardy was desponding and 'expecting Coopers ultimate triumph & advancement'.84 But in Lord Langdale Cole had a friend and a patron, who not only supported him but also understood him. After an interview on 31 October Cole wrote, I found him very affable and counselling against too rough & direct bearing, & that diplomacy was always necessary to effect objects. He said my character was always to give people pokes & that it was too critical. For his own part he did not mind it, but the world in general disliked it'. This long entry in Cole's diary shows that he took Langdale's advice in good part; but the experiences of the last few years had made him much more abrasive, and that was how he continued.

Through the summer of 1837 Cole was working on his frst book, Henry VIII's horickscont  tesoun thee th I based on the records that Cole knew so well. It was published by Charles Knight, who was an important figure in the dissemination of educational and radical ideas. Cole first mentions Knight in his diary in March 1837, and he put the idea of publishing his Scheme of Bishopricks to him on 29 September of that year. After that, they were on friendly terms until Knight's death in 1863. Knight had first set up as a 'miscellaneous' publisher in 1822 but failed. He was rescued when Henry Brougham's Society for the Advancement of Useful Knowledge appointed him as its publisher in 1827.85 Knight's most successful publication was the Penny Magazine, launched in March 1832. It had a circulation of 200,o0o within nine months, and ran until December 1845. Cole was able to place articles on his chosen subjects in this popular periodical, and in its sister publication the Penny Cyclopaedia: and, in the rapidly developing field of pictorial journalism, where Cole was making a mark, Knight was a very useful contact.

Although Cole's professional life was again secure, his domestic life was not proof against disaster. On the morning of 23 November 1837 he and Marian were awoken at five in the morning by the baby. He was ill, and Henry spent the whole day nursing him. He developed a cough and the doctor was called. A week later it was clear that he was 'very alarmingly ill', and a second doctor 'intimated that he thought there was great danger'. A little food was given to Downer. 'We thought him better, when alas! about 8 Oclock as lying in his Mothers arms, there seemed a catching in his breath, like the hiccup, and with the gentlest sigh he died. Marian tried all means of resuscitation but to no purpose for some hours, and was obliged to believe the sad reality.'86 He was six months old. Two days later, 'Marian after taking leave of Baby, who even in his coffin was beautiful, left the House with her mother & Charlotte. My Father attended the funeral with me, we went in a coach to the [Brompton] Cemetery. Baby's grave was at the Western end . . . the first grave being also for a Child buried the same day'. After this tragedy Marian was unable to stay in their house in Kensington, and Henry tried to sub-let it while they lived in lodgings in Pentonville. Edwin Chadwick disliked being left on his own and suddenly decamped at only one day's notice.

The government's delay over the Records Bill was finally ended in the spring of 1838 when Lord Langdale threatened resignation. As a result, Cooper, who had become Langdale's secretary for record business on the demise of the Record Commission, took Silk and was replaced as secretary by F. S. Thomas, from the State Paper Office. The government's bill was introduced in July, and received the royal assent in August. The various depositories of records were now united to form a Public Record Office, under the Master of the Rolls. Working to him there was now to be a chief keeper of records, confusingly titled 'deputy keeper' (so as not to prejudice Langdale's position as overall head). Thomas Hardy hoped for this post, as he was now senior clerk at the Tower, but after a good deal of to-ing and fro-ing the post went to Sir Francis Palgrave, and Hardy had to serve under his old adversary for over 20 years, until Sir Francis's death in 1861. Sir Francis, who was not paid as much as he wished, had, during negotiations, dismissed as intolerable the suggestion that he might accept a lower post, since this might mean he would be 'compelled to sit at the same desk with Mr. Cole and take orders from Mr. Hardy'.87 In the new dispensation, Cole was re-instated in the record service, under the benign eye of Lord

Langdale, as one of four assistant keepers, first class (£4oo a year). He was in charge of the records of the Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas. 88 Cole also managed to get his brother Charles taken on to the staff of the Public Record Office, in the face of Palgrave's opposition. Despite increasing eccentricity, amounting to mental insta-

Henry, secure in his post, might have become a scholar-archivist. He published two academic books, Henry the Eighth's scheme of bishopricks (1838) and Documents illustrative of English history in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries $\left( \textrm { I } 8 4 4 \right)$ .But he was not cut out to be a desk-bound scholar, and became increasingly involved in administration, putting right some of the inadequacies of the records service, and preparing for the establishment of the new Record Office in Chancery Lane in 1851.

In February 1839, with the cautious backing of Thomas Hardy, he submitted to Langdale a scheme for re-organizing the records, offering it with rather emphatic deference: 'Should it seem, that I am hereby overstepping my proper position, I trust your Lordship will overlook the indiscretion & bear in mind that I am sincerely zealous for the good of the Service.'90 Many of his ideas came through into practice, though his proposed reduction of search fees did not meet with approval from Palgrave.1 Cole's practical streak led him to take an intense interest in the cleaning, binding, labelling and shelving of records, and in Fifty Years he takes pleasure in recalling how he colour-coded the records in his charge, to prevent them from being misplaced, and had labels printed, on a hand press in the office, making clear what was in each item.92

Cole kept up a 'continuous agitation' for an enlarged force of porters and workmen who would look after the physical state of the records. He tried to get them a graduated pay scale, and concerned himself with their welfare to the extent that he was reproved for buying them beer in 1840. When, in 1842, Palgrave tried to favour junior clerks at the expense of workmen, Cole fercely defended the latter, sressing their precarious status, with no insurance or pension.93 In 1845-6 Cole was again in dispute with Palgrave over the workmen, when Palgrave complained that they were taking too much sick leave, and that expenditure on their beer had gone up again. Cole became 'very angry' at these reflections on his administration and threatened to take the matter to Langdale, at which Palgrave backed down.94

From the official fles, then, Cole emerges as a champion of the workers. This is in contrast to the picture he paints, 4o years after the event. Utilitarianism was often concerned more with efficiency than with benevolence and compassion (as witness the New Poor Law), and in Fifty Years Cole paints himself as a hard manager. The workmen, he stresses,

were paid by the hour and hired by the day . . an arrangement which especially commen iel he Treasury, involvinolongengaen a spt. As far as I know, this was the only Government office which had daily servants of this sort. Some years afterwards, there was an extensive strike in the Metropolis between the builders and their workmen upon the question o the length o hours o working in he week, and what interpretation was to be put on the word 'day.' I told my experience of e r strike was ended.The practice is now, I believe,universal in metropolitan trades, and public clerks are paid by the hour.95

Thus Cole writing as a grand ol man with a reputation as a disciplinarian, tie o tone down the subversive activities of his youth.

He himself enjoyed considerable latitude in his terms and conditions of work. From 1838 onwards he was constantly engaged in campaigns which had nothing to do with his offcial work, and for which Langdale gave him time off. It was Langdale's liberal view that 'the salaries of assistant keepers were too low and that they could not be blamed for doing other things'. As to what other activities might be permissible, he again took a very tolerant line.

What endeavours are proper? Is it clear whether extra employments are more or less inconvenient or dangerous to the service in proportion to their being more or less connected with the public or official employments[?] Writing histories, or dissertations or reviews on subjects of history as shewn or illustrated by Official documents in charge of the Officers, will by some be thought more fitting, & by others be thought most likely to seduce the officer from the strictly official line of duty - plausible reasons may be given for very different opinions.

Cultivating - or even teaching  abstract science or painting  drawing - music etc or exhibiting specimens of art - will by some be thought particularly eligible, because the subjects are in general remote from those which are the special object of official consideration.97

This is, in effect, Langdale's charter for Cole's activities between 1838 and 1850. With the select committee report on the records and the subsequent legislation, Cole discovered his abilities as a reformer, and almost at once, having retrieved his principal employment, he turned his attention to major reform in another field: the Post Office.
