> 来源：The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# PART FOUR: THE LEVERS OF POWER

CHAPTER 9

If the Great Exhibition can be seen as symbolising a new sense of confidence in Britain in 185 1 - for Britain had successfully adjusted to the French Revolution, the Napoleonic Wars, the industrial revolution and the emergence of a democratic electorate  it must be acknowledged, as a modern scholar observes, that 'the sense of confidence was recent, and was celebrated with a degree of relieved surprise'1 Not for the only time, Cole's personal mood probably matched that of the nation. His work on the Great Exhibition had brought him to a position of national influence and prominence, but success had been achieved at some risk, and suddenly. His instinctive confidence must have been tempered by a sense of relieved surprise.

He must also have wondered what would come next. To start with, he might have reflected that the project on which he had worked so hard still had considerable impetus. By the summer of 185 1, the Great Exhibition team had had time to get their breath back. Having achieved a triumph, they began to make plans to perpetuate something of their achievement, rather than see it all disappear when the exhibition closed, as it was pledged to do, on October I 1. Cole was first off the mark. On 5 July he persuaded the commissioners to form a small collection of exhibits and documentation from the Exhibition, which could be the basis of a Trade Museum' or 'Museum of Manufactures'. Cole himself selected and organised this collection, which survived until about 1858.2 Soon, more ambitious ideas were abroad.

Prince Albert intervened on Wednesday 13 August, when he told his inner circle of trusted aides, including Cole, at a meeting at Osborne House, that he had devised a plan to invest the profits from the exhibition  for it was now clear that it would be a financial as well as a cultural success - in a new educational institution. By means of this institute, or college, or university (all sorts of names were tried out), the aims of the Great Exhibition could continue to be promoted: 'by the application of Science and Art to Industrial pursuits, the Industry of all nations may be raised in the scale of human employment'.3 The prince had launched his idea to several people in his circle a few days earlier, apparently urging them, as Cole later learned from Dilke, 'not to tell me'.4 But Cole probably got wind of it anyway, since even before Dilke spoke to him, he had spent the afternoon of Sunday Io August 'writing out plan of International University'. At any rate, Cole participated vigorously in the discussions on the prince's project that followed through the month of August. By January 1852, it was clear that whatever form the educational establishment might take, it would be located on land to be purchased by the exhibition commissioners near to the site of the exhibition. The site came to be called 'South Kensington', and, as it turned out, it was here that Cole's activities would be centred for the rest of his life.

In summer 185 1, however, his future was by no means clear. He spent some of Sunday 3 1 August developing a bright idea: a proposal to purchase a collection of objects from the Great Exhibition to serve as examples for students at the School of Design. The school's troubles had been thrown into the shade by the exhibition, but it obviously made sense that the school should derive some advantage from the great event. Through the Board of Trade, Cole obtained a grant of $\mathcal { E } _ { 5 }$ go to finance his project. Extracting such a sum from the Treasury was no mean feat: Cole's biographers detect here the influence of the Prince Consort, while Cole himself gave the credit to Lord Granville, vice-president of the Board of Trade.6 There is little doubt who gave the initial push. Cole wrote quite pressingly to Granville: 'If I could induce you to form a strong will to have the thing done it would be easily done, though I dare say there are no ostensible funds for the purpose, and when done I believe Parliament and every one would be grateful.'7 On getting the money, Cole put together a committee consisting of himself, Redgrave, Owen Jones and A. W. N. Pugin, and, during the final week of the exhibition on 7, 8, 9 and 1 1 October, they met to choose their objects. Their discussions must have been a significant crucible for the concoction of design doctrine in the Victorian period, but no record was kept. Almost all we know is that Pugin, whose 'enthusiasm' for the project was noted,8 and who had 'received the kindest attentions' from Cole, became very upset over the selection of the 'Italian poets' shield designed by Antoine Vechte, because it was not in the Gothic style.

In mid-October came news of rewards and honours for those concerned with the exhibition. Lord Granville told Cole on 15 October that knighthoods were to be given to Paxton, Fox, Cubitt and Dilke, while Northcote, Playfair and Cole himself would be made Companions of the Bath. At this time, the range of honours that the sovereign might bestow was limited, and strict precedent governed their bestowal. Peerges and bronecs were only given t thoe posses  sufficient pey means to support the dignity with becoming splendour'. 10 For ordinary people such as Cole, the only alternatives were knighthoods (which tended to be given to civic worthies), or the Companion of the Bath (the standard honour for people in the public service).

Dilke declined his knighthood, though he was later to get a baronetcy. Paxton, Fox and Cubitt were invested at Windsor at a Privy Council meeting on 23 October.Cole does not record any occasion on which he was invested with his honour, 12 though his accounts for November 185 1 reveal that he had to pay a fee of $\mathcal { E } _ { \mathrm { I } }$ for it. Some of his friends thought he ought to have got a knighthood, as is witnessed by a mock Valentine card sent to him by Thackeray in 1852: this has a sketch of the Queen knighting Cole, with verses (in Thackeray's comic version of demotic speech), 'The Quean I sea / That Rawyal Sole / "Rise hup (seshhee) / Sir Ennary Cole!" /And now at Vin / -ser Castle dine; / And be my Ansum Walentine.' It was not until 1875 that Cole became Sir Henry.

On 15 October 1851, Granville also disclosed that financial awards would be made: $\mathcal { L } _ { 3 }$

of the executive committee. Though Reid and Dilke declined the honorarium, Cole was not able to make such a grand gesture.

Mr. C  f was suspended, though he was moderately paid for his services by the Royal Commission, accepts remuneration, which no one who has witnessed his exertions will grudge him. Indeed, he deserves to be considered the real acting spirit . .of the undertaking, and, therefore, deserves to be amply paid.13

For his exhibition work Cole was paid £3,692 in all.14

This task now being completed, Cole must have looked round eagerly for new opportunities. He did not have to wait long for a door to open. On Friday 31 October, Lord Granville offered him the secretaryship of the School of Design. This was an existing post but not a vacant one, still being occupied by Walter Ruding Deverell, who had been secretary since 1843. But Granville evidently intended that Deverell should be moved, perhaps into the post in the Public Records that was still being kept warm for Cole. 15

With this prospect in view, Cole took a late autumn break, travelling to Vienna with Herbert Minton to deliver a dessert service as a gift from the Queen to the emperor of Austria. Leaving on 19 November, they travelled via Bruges, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Dresden and Prague, arriving in Vienna on 4 December; on the way back they took in Berlin. It was a snowy journey, sometimes by sledge when trains and carriages could not get through. Travel had its ups and downs. Among the downs were hot, tobacco-filled rooms: 'the variety & intensity of the heated stinks is something most impressive,' Cole noted at Magdeburg. Among the ups was food. They passed an hour in the station restaurant at Düsseldorf dining for three shillings and sixpence on 'pease soup . . . beefsteak fried in fresh butter, with pickled gherkins . . . boiled codfish and veal cutlets with potatoes & greens;— then some eels, some tête de veau & a sweet omelette: then some partridges - & lastly a dessert of Pears, Apples, & three sorts of sweet biscuits . . . with a bottle of Rhein wine'.16

Since Cole was about to begin a career as one of the most successful art museum curators of all time, it is interesting to notice some of his comments on museums and monuments. Guided by his Murray's handbook, he sought out a 'very fine' collection of Raphael drawings in Düsseldorf. After some trouble, he 'penetrated where an old professor sat in an unfurnished room' and was shown a box of drawings 'professing to be by Perugino, Raffaelle &c.' He found them 'very indifferent', and, acting the connoisseur, remarked that 'it was a weary half hour to affect to examine them'.

He met the late Gothic and baroque art of Prague for the first time, and his design reformer's dogmatism comes through in his condemnation of 'violent Specimens of Naturalistic Ornament in an exaggerated French 1 7th century style' and 'vile statues on the parapets' of the Charles Bridge. In the Brunswick museum he saw maiolica but was not impressed: 'we had much finer specimens in the Society of Arts Mediaeval Exhibition and they are often to be seen in John Webb's window in Bond Street'. The Green Vaults in Dresden, one of the greatest European treasure chambers, he dismissed as 'mere articles of no use to which years & months of work had been given'. He was happier in the Historical Museum at Dresden, where 'the Art in Metalwork . . . is quite wonderful. Specimens of all kinds of Tools'.17

He often noted down things that he thought should be copied, in the form of plaster casts or drawings, as models for the School of Design, and he purchased some ceramics in Dresden, and in Berlin two fans 'on the chance of them being useful for the Female School of Design some day'. The habit of organising exhibitions stayed with him. Looking round the Continental museums, he wondered: 'Might not some of the things be borrowed by the Government? Might not a system be established of an international lending of those portions of a collection that would not be likely to suffer in travelling? This might easily be done by Railways now?

$$
\begin{array} { c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c } { { \gamma _ { \parallel } ^ { \prime } } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { { } } & { } & { { } } & { { } } & { } & { { } } & { } & { { } } & { } \end{array}
$$

Back home, Cole took up the question of the purchases for the School of Design, meeting with a setback when the secretary of the Board of Trade, G. R. Porter, 'said the whole thing was most irregular, that the purchases ought never to have been made as there was no . . . room', declaring that he would take no responsibility for the project.19 However, Cole was unstoppable as the coming man at the School of Design, and on 14 January 1852 Henry Labouchere officially asked him 'to undertake the management' of the school. The intention now was to relaunch the school, and to have it run by an artist and a layman, working in harness. Cole was to be the layman, while the artist would be his old friend Richard Redgrave (plate 33), who was already the principal teacher in the school. Redgrave was discreetly asked by Labouchere if he could work with Cole, since the latter 'had the reputation of not being an easy man to get on with'.20 Redgrave agreed to try. Labouchere thereupon proposed to the Treasury that the Board of Trade should set up a sub-department called the Department of Practical Art. Cole would be the full-time head of it, paid £1,ooo a year; 'his tenure of office should depend altogether upon the satisfactory manner in which he discharges the duties which belong to it'. Redgrave, being 'an artist of high professional character', could not be 'expected to give up all his time to the business of the Department' and would work part time for £3oo a year. The department was created by Treasury approval on 3 1 January.

On the day when Cole's department was created, Minton (who was I5 years his senior) wrote to him: 'I am glad to hear that you have taken office in the management of the Sch. of Design. You may be very useful if you will only be more mild & gentle than you usually are  not so obstinate & dictatorial  and believe that you may sometimes be wrong & others right. I hope this plain speaking may not prove unpalatable.1 Perhaps Cole bore it in mind during his rather diffcult early days when he had to impose his authority upon the existing staff in the School of Design.

It had been decided that, while Cole and Redgrave would be in charge of the new department, Deverell would stay on as secretary of the school. Labouchere thought him 'not the best applointment] but he cloul]d not get rid of him'. Cole soon learned that 'Deverell was annoyed' at the arrival of a new chief.2 Cole and Deverell had it out on 2o February. Cole had discovered that at Somerset House 'students come and go as they like', and there were no records of 'the period when any student entered i   a dent is now studying in, or what his present or proposed occupation may be, or any similar information'.23 Cole laid this negligence at Deverells door, and pressed him to 'admit that he had been responsible for the management' of the school and had 'failed'. Deverell hit back by accusing Cole of misrepresenting the School in his enquiries in 1849 so as to create an opening for himself: 'said I had made a hole large enough for myself to creep in by the S[elect] Committee of 1849'. Deverell, 'peevish & fretful', tried to obstruct or bypass Cole and complained whenever he could. Cole warned him that 'one or other of us w[oul]d have to go', and Labouchere made him promise to work amicably with Cole.4 Deverell took to coming in late or staying off sick. Cole tried to win him round by appointing his son Wykeham to a clerkship in the department.25 In July, Cole was lobbying Prince Albert, Lord Derby, the Lord Chancellor and J. Shaw-Lefevre to move Deverell into the Patent Office, but with no luck.2 He next tried to get Deverell transferred to a post as inspector of the Drawing Schools but this was not approved by his minister. The problem was solved only when Deverell, who had been 'run over & lamed', died in June 1853.27

Other members of staff were also unhappy. J. R Herbert resigned on I 1 March; R. N. Wornum, the librarian, had to be brought to heel; and H. J. Townsend wanted to resign.28 Cole also had to secure his position with his superiors. To begin with he had to get a foot in the door at the Board of Trade. A friendly clerk, Thomas Poole Ward, offered him a seat in his office, but eventually Cole was allotted a desk in the boardroom, where he installed a screen and a wash-hand-stand, to the annoyance of G. R. Porter.29 Within his first month in the job, however, Cole was planning to move the School of Design into better premises - to the royal mansion Marlborough House in the Mall, which was already partly in use as overflow exhibition rooms for the National Gallery, and had also been used in spring 185 1 to accommodate an exhibition of the work of students of the school. 30 Through Prince Albert, Cole gained the Queen's permission to use the upper floors. He recalled that on obtaining the keys, 'I moved in with all speed, and when the rooms were all arranged, it was found out that the usual official formalities had not been followed . . .. I was upbraided'.31 Cole knew perfectly well that he was cutting corners. The department moved into Marlborough House in Easter week, and Cole agreed with Porter that he would have his office there. No doubt Porter was glad to see the back of the wash-hand-stand.32

Cole's primary task was to put into good order the art teaching system of the School of Design in London and its 19 satellite schools in provincial towns. When offering his suggestions to save the schools to the select committee in 1849, he had ridden one of his hobbyhorses  the faults of administration by committee ("a subject which, for the last 1 5 years, I have paid some attention to'), and had recommended 'practical individual responsibility'.33 Now that he was in practical and individual control of the school, the main part of this problem was solved. But he wanted to extend the principle down the line. Some classes were still to continue at Somerset House, and though Redgrave had moved up to be jointly in charge of the department, and Herbert had resigned, Cole did not want any trace of the old system in which 'the chief authority is divided between masters of equal rank'. Accordingly, on 30 March 1852, he proposed to his superiors a reorganisation that would place 'the whole duties of discipline, management, and instruction at Somerset House under one master, who . . . shall be charged with the sole responsibility of this school'.34 The man he chose for this role was Richard Burchett, who had been one of the most talented students at the school in the 184os. Despite this  or perhaps because of it he had been a leader in the student revolt against the feeble teaching. However, 'he distinguished himself so considerably by industry, intelligence, and especially by his attainments in geometry, that he became a sort of unofficial master before he took office at all', and subsequently 'his capacity appeared so strongly that his rapid promotion was assured'.35 Cole installed him on 1 1 May, and told him he 'might recommend his assistants'. 36 Burchett remained as headmaster of the London school, in its various metamorphoses, until his death at the age of 57 in 1875.

Cole prided himself on the clear lines of responsibility in his department, and on its administrative transparency and accountability to the public.37 He also repeatedly asserted that it should be 'self-supporting'. This was the opening point that he made in a memorandum prepared to accompany his first estimates, that is, the budget for his department that he had to submit for parliamentary approval. He worked on this at the start of the year, and tried it out on Lord Granville, who polished the style and wrote at the end 'hurrah'. He read it on 29 February to Prince Albert, who hardly changed it. And he submitted it to Stafford Northcote, who made some trenchant criticisms, undermining Cole's statistics and counselling him not to devolve power to the local committees that ran the art schools. While Cole did not pay much heed to these points, Northcote was successful in persuading him to omit the madly reckless claim that 'the test of success' for the new department 'would consist in a progressive diminution of the Government grant'.38 The final version of the memorandum became a letter of 10 March 1852 to J. W. Henley, who became president of the Board of Trade in the new Conservative government, which took office on 27 February 1852. Here Cole contents himself with the ambition to make 'the Department as far as practicable self-supporting'.39 No doubt it was a shrewd move to assure his political master that the department would not cost anything, since he found that Henley regarded the Schools of Design as 'miserable failures' and did not want to 'extend the nuisance'.40 However, provincial schools, which had hitherto received block grants, were severely discomfited by the new requirement that they should pay their way.41

Cole held to his position, but with prudent qualifications. In a lecture in June, he repeated that 'the highest point of ambition' for the department 'should be, to become able to decline any pecuniary assistance from the Government', but fell back on a more cautious phrase: it would be 'as far as possible self-supporting'.42 In a lecture in November, while declaring that 'the principle of self-support should never be forgotten', he conceded that for the time being the department would observe the 'mixed principle' of partial subsidy.43

While extracting as much money as he could from the government with one hand, Cole continued to hold out his other hand to the public. He encouraged the Schools oDig to hol classs not nly for artisans, butin themongs when the artn could not attend, to welcome 'the upper and middle classes', who could be expected Henley, Cole floated the idea that regional art schools might be supported from local taxation, just as museums and public libraries could be, in consequence of William Ewart's Museums and Libraries Acts of 1845 and 1850. Nothing came of this, but the department insisted that new schools must be begun and administered by local committees of management, with the department in a supporting role. Eventually, the department devised a system of paying teachers on the basis of the results their pupils achieved in the department's examinations. Payment by results has been much criticised as educationally stultifying. The department viewed it both as an incentive to teachers and as a reassurance to the public that standards were being maintained. Cole always had a powerful drive to expand his empire to the utmost, but he had to trim to the orthodox view that then prevailed (and which, indeed, he largely shared) in favour of 'small' government and minimal public expenditure.

Wrestling with the budget was only one of the many issues that Cole and Redgrave dealt with. Equally, if not more, important was educational policy. The first essential in art education was the teaching of drawing. Testifying before the select committee in 1849, Cole had declared: 'I should wish to see it carried ten times beyond what it is now, and even to the extent of making the learning of drawing a part of the instruction in national schools'.45 When the select committee failed to give him the influence he hoped for, he turned towards the promotion of elementary drawing by other means: through a drawing committee of the Society of Arts, formed in 1850, in which he was the principal activist. The committee achieved only a little  after all, Cole was very busy at this time  and faded away in 1852 when Cole's department started. As has been pointed out, 'it seems more than coincidence that the Society's interest in elementary drawing schools should begin in the year in which Henry Cole gained control of the Council, and end when he, realizing the Society's inadequacy, had found a seemingly more efficient machine to carry out his project'.46

The teaching of elementary drawing was the first task to which Cole committed the new department. In March, he argued to Henley that 'drawing is in fact an indispensable branch of good general education'.47 One of the earliest acts of the department was to open an elementary drawing school in the Mechanics Institute, Great Smith Street, Westminster: at its opening ceremony, on 2 June, Cole and Redgrave took the opportunity to deliver speeches extolling the value of drawing as a second language.48 In his November lecture, Cole felt confident enough to say that 'the Government . . . has broadly affirmed the principle that elementary knowledge of form and colour shall become part of the national education: and this department is charged to carry this important principle into effect'.49 The department would now not only provide elementary drawing instruction in its own schools, but would also support drawing classes in any elementary schools that were prepared to co-operate with it.

Once the basic drawing skills had been learned, they could be developed in various directions. This was to be the task of the department's network of provincial schools, which henceforth would be able to devote themselves less to elementary and more to advanced teaching. They were to follow a 22-stage syllabus in drawing, painting, modelling and composition, devised by Richard Redgrave; the department set and marked exams in all the stages of the syllabus. Cole was determined that the teachers he employed should be adequate to their task. Their employment was now dependent on their possessing appropriate certificates from the department, which were obtained by passing exams in the various stages of the syllabus. Six certificates were available, based on groupings of the 22 stages in the syllabus; each certificate obtained brought a teacher a £ 1o annual bonus to his wages.50 In order to provide a supply of teachers for the expanding elementary drawing classes, training courses of six months duration were provided by a 'Teachers' Training Master', appointed in October 18 52. This brought to London the young J. C. Robinson (plate 34), a bright, up-and-coming master from the department's school at Hanley, Staffordshire: he was soon to play a decisive part in the development of the department's museum. Teacher training continued to be necessary, and in due course the London school came to concentrate entirely on producing teachers to service the rest of the department's network.

In his testimony to the select committee of 1849, Cole's main complaint, educationally, had been that the schools of design were 'not practical'. He had argued that the teaching of practical skills, necessary for various crafts and trades, was the prime purpose of the school, and in 1852 he returned to this theme. In his November lecture, he went to some trouble to demonstrate by appropriate quotations from official sources that technical instruction had always been at the heart of the schools' work.51 Nonetheless, he was not sure how to develop it. 'Caution will necessarily have to be exercised,' he had remarked in March, as he drew up a list of 'classes of manufacture in which ornamental design forms an element, and is governed by the process', and a questionnaire to manufacturers, intended to elicit just what kind of demand for technical classes existed in British industry.52 Meanwhile, a small group of classes was set up at Marlborough House. 'Architectural details and practical construction' was taught by C. J. Richardson; Octavius Hudson taught 'Textile fabrics and surface decoration'; the German émigré Gottfried Semper led a class on the principles and practice of ornamental art applied to metals and furniture; painting on porcelain was taught to men and women by J. Simpson; and wood-engraving was taught to women only by John Thompson, Cole's old friend. Classes on lithography for women, on plaster casting and moulding conducted by Signor Brucciani, and on technical drawing appeared and disappeared. These specialised classes were obviously much more difficult to sustain than the drawing classes, and lasted only a few years.53

Hardly had they begun, in September 1852, when Semper's metalwork class and Hudson's fabrics class were called upon to make a very public demonstration of their skills. The duke of Wellington died on 14 September and a state funeral, with procession, was decreed. The funeral carriage proposed by the royal undertaker did not meet with Prince Albert's favour, and the School of Design was commissioned to produce something better, 'unready as the students may have been to respond to so early a call upon thei slightly trained abilities'5 It was a race against time, sincy three weeks remained before the funeral on 18 November. 'So great was the pressure at last, that for eighty hours preceding the starting of the car, the workmen of two bronze foundries had not had their clothes off their backs; and up to the very dawn of the day some fifty female students of the school were at work on the embroideries.' Cole conceded that a couple of missing bronze details had to be faked in papier mâché, and that the whole thing was perhaps too elaborate, but it was nonetheless a triumph for the school to have produced such an object.55

Public reaction was not very favourable. Charles Greville thought the carriage tawry, cubrous, andvulgarAnother learne criic while conding therivation of the carriage from 'the well known woodcut designs of Maximilian's triumps, lmented that the execution had been rushed (hardly a single thoough piece of work throughout the whole affair') and saw this as of a piece with the 'restless vitality'of Cole's methods of administration. He remarked that 'the constant fresh bulletins and edicts from the central school to the provincial localities, one order almost overtaking the other on the road, have, with reason, frequently put the Art-commites in the country seriously out f tmper Nonetheless, when the new academic year opened in September 185 2, the Schools of Design had been thoroughly overhauled by the new management.

In pursuing his mission, not just to administer a network of design schools, but to transform the taste of the whole nation, Cole attached great importance to the influence of a museum. Examples of works of art had been collected by the old School of Design in London for the benefit of students, and had been circulated to some extent to provincial schools.58 In March, in his letter to Henley, Cole recommended that such study of examples should continue.59 It could not have been long, however, before he came to see the exhibition of examples as more than just a service for students: in his November lecture he stressed that the public museum that had now been established was the means of 'educating all classes' in order to 'improve the national taste'.60

The creation of a museum of international repute from almost nothing was one of Cole's greatest achievements. It seems likely that he looked around him in 185 2 and perceived a gap to be filled. Certainly, when he looked back in 1866 after 14 years of museum development, he found little to praise in the cultural amenities of early nineteenth-century London. Then, the only museum was the British Museum, jeered at in Parliament as a 'terra incognita' and visited by 'about a hundred visitors a day . . . in parties of five persons only'.

The state of things outside the British Museum was analogous. Westminster Abbey was closed, except for divine service . . . . Admittance to the public monuments in St. Paul's and other churches, was irksome to obtain, and costly: even the Tower of London could not be seen for less than six shillings. The private picture galleries were most difficult of access, and, for those not belonging to the upper ten thousand, it might be a work of years to get a sight of the Grosvenor or Stafford Collections. No National Gallery existed, and Lord Liverpool's Government refused to accept the pictures offered by Sir Francis Bourgeois, now at Dulwich, even on the condition of merely housing them . .. . Kew Gardens were shabby and neglected, and possessed no Museum. Hampton Court Palace was shown, by a fee to the housekeeper, one day in the week . .. . The Royal Academy had its annual exhibition of modern art on the first and second floors of Somerset House . ... It was only at the British Institution, or at Christie's auction rooms, that a youthful artist like Mulready could chance to see the work of an old master, as he has often told us . . . . But an immense change has taken place within a recent time. No topics excite such warm and animated debates in Parliament as the purchase and preservation of pictures and sites of museums, and the public give manifestations of their wishes throughout the country, which are apparently in advance of the temper of Parliament.61

No wonder that in 18 5 2 Cole seized the opportunity to create a popular museum of art. And no wonder that later on he believed that it had had a tonic effect.

Cole's museum opened in Marlborough House on 17 May, only a month after his department had moved in. The Queen and the Prince Consort attended the opening, and 'seemed very pleased'. The first exhibition was limited to designs by the students of the school (who were accustomed to mounting annual displays of their work) and the examples of good modern design purchased from the Great Exhibition. This exhibition was open until the end of June, when the museum closed for the summer vacation. In August, Cole obtained some respite from administration, and with the help of the dealer John Webb started to seek out examples (for loan or purchase) of historic art for the museum. His diary reveals that they went prospecting in the royal collections: to Buckingham Palace for Sèvres porcelain on 13 August, to Hampton Court on 20 August for pictures. Tapestries were also requisitioned from Hampton Court. Cole treated with dealers: Webb himself loaned 'China &c.', and Henry Farrer of Bond Street agreed to exhibit Dutch pottery 'subject to our buying some'.62 When the museum reopened on 6 September, its holdings of historic art had been considerably boosted.

The refreshed museum was featured in The Times, in an article inspired, perhaps even written, by Cole. Henley greeted him on 6 September with the words, 'I see your Puff in the Times. I use a homely word, but I don't mean to imply that it is undesirable to have it.' His words hint, all the same, at a fastidious distaste for publicity. The Times article made the most of the fact that the Queen had lent very expensive pieces of Sèvres porcelain, in which 'there will be found united the highest triumphs of chymistry, the most exquisite skill of the modeller, and the finest achievements of the painter'. It expatiated on the new plaster casts on view, stressing that they showed the architecture and ornament of the Renaissance: Cole was never an enthusiast for the Gothic Revival. And it introduced a new section, on which the writer bestowed a catchy nickname. 'The ante-room is fitted up as a sort of "chamber of horrors," with a collection of all kinds of so-called ornamental manufacture, which are considered to exhibit false principles of decoration.'63

Only Henry Cole would have ventured to devise this display of bad taste, thrust at visitors as the first thing they saw. It contained 87 items (listed in a printed catalogue, which, according to Cole's diary, he was writing on 12 August).64 These objects offended against the principles on which Cole and his 'Purchases Committee' had relied when selecting, from the 185 1 exhibition, the examples of good taste that now formed the core of the museum. Richard Redgrave had developed the principles in a special report he prepared in 1851,65 and Cole's catalogue quotes from Redgrave, cially criticised by Redgrave.

Or-molu stems and leaves bear porcelain flowers painted to imitate nature, and candles are made to rise out of tulips and China asters, while gas jets gush forth from opal Arums. Stems, bearing flowers for various uses, arise from groups of metal leaves, standing tiptoe on their points . . .and every constructive truth, and just adaptation to use, is disregarded for a senseless imitative naturalism. In the same way . .. enormous wreaths of flowers, fish, game, fruits, &c., imitated à merveille, dangle around sideboards, beds, and picture-frames. Glass is tortured out of its true quality to make it into thecup  a lily o an anemone  In fabrics where flatness would sem most essential, this imitative treatment is often carried to the greatest excess . . .; and carpets are ornamented with water-lilies floating on their natural bed, with fruits and flowers pouredforthinverwhelming abundance in all the gloryof their shades and hues or we are startled by a lion at our hearth, or a leopard on our rug . . . while palm-trees and landscapes are used as the ornaments of muslin curtains.66

Objects exemplifying these and other supposed solecisms in design were held up to ment, in giving its reasons for condemning the individual examples here shown, afford the public an opportunity of testing the accuracy of the canons it enforces in its instructions to the students' But surely Cole was motivated not just by an earnest desire to stimulate disinterested consideration of the principles of design, but also by an urge to grab publicity by making mischief. He succeeded  at the cost, perhaps, of rubbing up his public the wrong way. An article that appeared in Dickens's weekly magazine Household Words on 4 December 1852 (from which Cole quotes in Fifty Years) amusingly portrays the resentment of a visitor on discovering that his taste is bad. And the makers of the displayedobjects 'raised an outcry' at their publichumiliation.67 Before too long, the display was tidied away.

Cole reached his most extreme position as a design reformer in the early 1850s. His belief in a playful seemliness, which inspired the Summerly Art-Manufactures, had gradually given way to a dogmatic definition of artistic propriety. This was expounded negatively, by malediction, in the 'chamber of horrors'. Positively, it was preached through a set of rules that Cole and Redgrave caused to be drawn up in 1853. In describing their efforts, they consciously used religious language. In the previous paragraph Cole is quoted on enforcing 'canons'. Redgrave, too, spoke of canons, and of dogmas and catechisms. Their rules, drawn up with the help of Gottfried Semper, were issued in departmental publications, under the title 'General Principles of Decorative Art', and were hung up in large format in the Art School, where they remained to guide students for many years.68 It is not surprising that they provoked some derision. The article about the chamber of horrors in Dickens's Household Words was not written by Dickens but by Henry Morley; it was not long, however, before Dickens himself had a go at Cole. The latter appears, in the guise of an aggressively pedantic government official laying down the law on taste to schoolchildren, in chapter 2 of the novel Hard Times, which began to appear in instalments in April 1854.69 Dickens and Cole corresponded good-humouredly about Cole's immortalisation in fiction, Dickens tactfully conveying his view of Cole: 'that there is reason and good intention in much that he does . . . but that he over-does it'.70

During the year 18 5 2 Cole's life continued at a hectic pace. His working day often extended into evening meetings. Even if at home in the evenings, he frequently saw colleagues for discussions, or dealt with paperwork. He made a point of dining with his children on Sundays, but even that day often included a sizeable slice of work. In early summer, from 7 to 19 June, he made an official trip to Ireland, to visit the Cork International Exhibition and to institute a school of design at Limerick and a drawing school at Waterford. At the end of the year, from 4 to 17 December, he made a tour of the Schools of Design in the north Midlands, Marian and Mary accompanying him. The family spent their holidays at Broadstairs in September, and Cole stayed the last fortnight of the month with them, though still polishing off offcial work. On Wednesday 29 September, for instance, he 'played at Marbles with [the] Children' and at whist in the evening, but also occupied himself 'revising administration of the Department'. The main family events in the year were the birth of Cole's eighth child (and fifth daughter) Rose Owen on 2 August, and the death of his brother Lindsay, of acute dropsy at the age of 42, on I 5 July, while Cole was in Ireland.

On Good Friday, 9 April 18 52, Cole commissioned the painter George Smith to make 'pictures of [his] Children', a project which developed into a 'Family Picture', for which Cole himself sat on 2 1 October. The painting, entitled Evenings at Home (plate 2 5 ), is an interesting variation on an established iconographic theme. In a conventional family portrait, the father would be accorded the place of honour, the wife would gracefully defer to him, and offspring would be disposed hierarchically around. In Cole's picture, Marian modestly dominates, and the children command more or less equal notice, but Cole himself is almost invisible, reduced to a shadowed head, apparently dozing, in the background. A family tradition suggests that he was always too busy to turn up for sittings, so had to be squeezed in inconspicuously. However, a 'first sketch' for the picture71 shows a similar disposition of figures, so perhaps Cole deliberately subverted the accustomed iconography.

## \* \* \*\*

The year 18 5 3 was no less busy than 1 8 5 2. Cole continued to grapple with the problems of administering the schools; the London male school finally vacated Somerset House in this year.72 Cole also tried to develop the museum, which, as an innovation, was on trial and aroused tantalisingly different responses. He noted in his diary on 22 February that distinguished visitors to the museum had given him within hours of each other the contradictory advice that 'you sh[oul]d not teach the public' and 'you should first teach the Public'. Cole continued to pursue acquisitions and loans. Purchases were made from dealers, notably Webb and William Chaffers, and from the silversmiths Garrards, and Hunt and Roskell, who dealt in historic metalwork. Cole was directly involved in seeking loans from Lord Willoughby d'Eresby (11 March), Lord Spencer (23 April), and Mr C. Mills (25 May). The year's major acquisition was the ceramic collection of the Foreign Office official, James Bandinel, who died in 1849. This was purchased for £250 on 21 April 18 53.73 A few days before, on 18 April, Cole was invited by Ralph Bernal to see his collection; and on 23 May his old friend John Sheepshanks spoke to him 'about leaving his pictures to the Department of Art'. Both occasions were portents for the future of the museum.

The rooms in Marlborough House were already sufficiently full to make it impossible to accommodate there another annual exhibition of students' work. So the department borrowed Gore House, Kensington, now owned by the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, who were purchasing property in South Kensington for Prince Albert's grand scheme. Cole went to Windsor on 7 February to negotiate the use of Gore House with Prince Albert. The students' work was to be augmented by a loan exhibition of English cabinetwork, to which the prince agreed to lend. This was to comprise 'the finest Specimens of all periods and styles from the h h  tu  r u  ublc and included cabinets, coffers, commodes, buffets, chairs, tables, clocks, drawers, presses, couches, flower-stands, fire-screens, and even pairs of bellows'. It was noted that 'the rooms are not b nough to hold them;o that the visitors arecwed; and . .. the general effect, notwithstanding occasional gorgeousness, is heavy, and even somewhat gloomy'.75

The exhibition also included a display of studies by William Mulready from nude models. The Queen and Princess Royal paid a visit to the exhibition on 3o May. The department's minister, Edward Cardwell, taking a look round in advance with Redgrave, was shocked by the nude studies, and, as Redgrave recalled, 'particularly told me not to take the Queen into that room on any account. However, the Queen iI, yCo wh skey onne.76

In the exhibition of cabinetwork, the museum turned away somewhat from the doctrinaire towards the historical, but Cole remained a convinced design reformer, and in this capacity (and presumably also in his capacity as a Kensington resident) delivered an address 'On public taste in Kensington' on 5 April 1853. 'Meeting full & sympathetic,' he recorded in his diary, 'but many thought the lecture very illnatured.' Indeed, so it was, as we can tell from the script (hastily written, much corrected, and ending in furious scribble), which Cole preserved in his Miscellanies.77 Just after the speech in Miscellanies volume 11 is another document, which deals with the setting up of drawing classes in Kensington. This, judicious in tone and neatly written, is perhaps what Cole originally intended to say. But the Kensington churchwardens had repulsed his attempts to hire the Vestry Hall as a drawing school. Much of his speech, therefore, is devoted to inciting his audience to complain to the vicar - and not only about the churchwardens' rebuff, but also about the low standard of music at St Mary Abbots church.

At the start, Cole attempts to convince his audience, by rhetorical ingenuity, that good taste must be imposed. He invokes a smelly 'Irish Hodman', living in squalor in Jennings Buildings, Kensington. In distinctly ill-natured tones, he argues that this wretch must be coerced into socially acceptable behaviour. 'We will call the police to see that only a limited number of persons shall sleep in his miserable, low, paper windowed garret. We will have its smoky walls whitewashed. He shall have better drainage whether he will or no & shall not have his accustomed stenches. It is not our taste to let him breed typhus fever whatever his may be.' Similarly, the hodman must be forced towards good taste in matters of design. But Cole's argument is too punitive to be convincing.

church as a patron of the arts.

Before the Reformation the Church in this country as in all countries and at all times was the director of the Arts. Each religious foundation partook more or less of the character of a School of Art where architecture, building, painting, sculpture, embroidery, glass painting, missal painting, music, physical science, agriculture, in fact all arts, were taught and practised and the results of the teaching illustrated. This agency spread over the whole land.

Can it be doubted that Cole felt that this divine mission had now devolved upon his own department?

While Cole may have been buoyed up by a sense of almost religious vocation, he had to contend with considerable difficulties in the political sphere. First he had to get used to new ministers, when in December 1852 Lord Derby's short-lived Conservative government was replaced by a coalition led by Lord Aberdeen. Edward

Cardwell took over from Henley as president of the Board of Trade, with Lord Stanley of Alderley as vice-president. Meeting Cole for the first time on 8 January, Cardwell modestly remarked that he 'wished me to consider him quite ignorant of the Department' but followed this up with a rather depreciatory comment when he 'asked if it were not altogether a novelty arising out of the Exhibition'. Cole does not record his own reply. Cardwell, slightly younger than Cole, was a Peelite Tory now on his way over to the Liberals, but not yet sufficiently accepted to earn a seat in the cabinet. This may have increased his natural caution: it was said that while Peel's 'caution was only exceeded by his ability, Mr. Cardwell's caution is exceeded by nothing at all, and it is sufficient to enable him to steer successfully through the nicest refinements on the greatest of questions without so much as a scrape'.78 Cole often felt impatient with Cardwel, to the point of considering resignation.79 But it was an advantage for him to be protected by such a circumspect minister.

A crisis arose soon enough, when the Department of Practical Art was re-created, over Cole's head, as the Department of Science and Art. On 21 January, Cardwell came to Marlborough House with Cole's old crony from the Great Exhibition, Lyon Playfair (plate 35). They had been to see Prince Albert the previous day (Playfair assured Cole that it had been intended that he should go too) and now came to tell Cole that his department was to be expanded to cover scientific as well as artistic education, and that Playfair was to come in as head of the science side, with rank and salary equal to Cole's. The initiative seems to have come from Prince Albert, as part of his endeavour to apply science and art to industry. Playfair attached importance also to his own interventions in support of scientific education, notably a lecture on Technical instruction on the Continent, which he delivered in autumn 1852 in his capacity as a professor at the Government School of Mines.80 We may regret that Cole did not confide his feelings to his diary when presented with this fait accompli. He could not have been pleased, but he bit his lip, and we have to reconstruct the situation from the comments of others. Playfair recalled that 'it was not without many a struggle and many a feud that the Science and Art Department at last took shape'.81 And in 185 5 Redgrave wrote to Cole, after a difficult discussion about science and art with their minister, Lord Stanley: 'I reminded him that it was not our wish the relation began - and that Science was at present an incubus to Art.'82 Cole and Playfair were friends, but there was certainly jockeying for position, with Cardwell trying to keep the peace. For instance, Cole recorded in his diary on 8 March that 'Mr Cardwell proposed my name sh[oulld be first as Secretary', above Playfair's, 'but that Science should stand before Art in the title' of the department. With such compromises were the new arrangements cemented. The department now took over several existing scientific institutions - notably the Geological Survey, the Government School of Mines, and the Museum of Practical Geology, all of which were commodiously rehoused in 185 1 in a new building in Jermyn Street, and the Museum of Irish Industry and the Royal Dublin Society. To be placed under new management was not to the taste of many staf in these institutions, especially the veteran Sir Henry de la Beche in Jermyn Street,83 so further personnel problems emerged.

Another complication came on 4 April when 'Northcote & Trevelyan began inquiry into our Department'. Northcote was Cole's friend Sir Stafford Northcote. Trevlyan washarTreveyan, whoarte h reern ndia with theas

India Company and eventually returned there as governor of Madras, but who was assistant secretary to the Treasury from 1840 to 1858. Cole usually dealt with him ovfial mars, ndig hi 'y cv  ridly rrg ht e to  retnteehe et houtheu t In tandem, Northcote and Trevelyan have their place in history as the authors of a report advocating reform of the organisation of the civil service, which they were commissioned to make in 1853 after serving together on a commission to re-organise the Board f Trade.Their report was instrumental in getting riof the old ligent and nepotistic staffing customs in the service and replacing them with disinterested, professional practices.

Cole was on their side. When they had written their report, it was circulated for comment to prominent officials, and Cole was 'one of the very few to approve the method of open competitive examinations', most being content with the system as it was.86 Characteristically, Cole had his comments printed for distribution. Denouncing the 'mischiefs of patronage' in the civil service, he alleged that, 'in respect of punctuality, promptitude of action, simplicity, accuracy in the accounts, style in the forms of registration, and cost of management', public offices could not compare with "any large merchant's counting house'. Pointing out that in the public service 'there is virtually little penalty paid for mistakes', he advocated that public servants should be employed on contract, that 'all candidates for the Civil Service without exception should be subjected to examination before appointment', that those appointed should undergo what we would now call induction training, and that civil service departments should be accountable to Parliament through annual reports. He took pleasure in averring that 'the advantages of preliminary examination before appointment have been signally proved by the great success' of his own appointment system in the Department of Practical Art.87

When he and Playfair frst encountered Northcote and Trevelyan on Monday 4 April, they were eager to enlist the support of the inquisitors in respect of their own pressing staffing problems. Cole secured Northcote's agreement about Deverell's 'incompetency', while Playfair gave 'strong testimony' as to the 'obstructiveness' of Sir Henry de la Beche at the School of Mines. After this good start, Cole was perhaps disconcerted when, on Thursday, Northcote and Trevelyan put to him their conclusion that the whole department 'depended on me', and that this ought not to be the case. The department should be 'so organized that it [would] go on without me'. Cole agreed that his staff should be augmented by a deputy and an 'Inspector'.

There were further discussions with Northcote and Trevelyan through the summer.88 The inquiry seems to have provoked anxiety and insecurity, as such inquiries usually do. By July, Cardwell was 'irritated with the idea' that Playfair and Cole were in a conspiracy to supersede his authority, Cole was threatening resignation because Cardwell seemed to be blocking Northcote and Trevelyan's report, and Cardwell was deploying the counter-threat that it was always open to him to 'cancel the proceedings of the department'.89 But on 23 July, Cole and Cardwell 'had a pretty full & frank explanation. Told him I felt I had not his confidence & that I w[oul]d prefer to retire. He promised every thing to make the Department a success sh[oul]d be done.' These days were made worse for Cole by agonising gall-bladder trouble: on 3o July he at last passed a small stone and had some relief.

Deverell's death in June solved one of the department's staffing problems. On 10 October a deputy arrived for Cole, in the form of Norman MacLeod (plate 37). Four years younger than Cole, he was the chief of the MacLeod clan; while a conscientious landlord of his Scottish estates, he was 'compelled by the disastrous famine of 1847, which ruined owners and tenants alike, to seek other means of livelihood'.90 At first confessing to being 'quite puzzled with the details' of his work, MacLeod was soon on top of it, and was unafraid of Cole, telling him on one occasion that he 'was too candid, to a fault'.91 Cole and MacLeod were soon on friendly terms. On 18 December 1854, Cole stayed overnight with the MacLeods in Ealing. He recorded that MacLeod had 'a good deal of Scotch Clanship' about him, noting also that his wife was 'gentle and pretty, so also his daughter', and that his sons were 'frank'. The MacLeod of MacLeod, as he was formally known, remained as the kingpin of the department for 30 years, until his retirement in 1882.

Another important staff appointment was the transfer of J. C. Robinson from the post of teacher training master to 'have temporary charge' of the museum from 12 September 1853, his position as curator being confirmed on 8 July 1854. Robinson had been trained in an architect's office, and had subsequently studied painting in Paris. On the strength of this experience, he had obtained employment as a drawing master at the schools of design first in his hometown of Nottingham and then in Hanley. The formative experience of his life, however, was his encounter in France with the new fashion for collecting decorative art objects of the Middle Ages and Renaissance: this, reinforced by an exhilarating visit to Italy, became his lifetime passion.92 It is clear that he advanced his career in the Department of Practical Art by deliberately drawing himself to Cole's notice, as a letter of 24 September 1852 illustrates.3 Whether, once in London, he was able to inveigle himself into the curatorship or whether the appointment was a prodigious stroke of luck, we cannot tell. We know that Cole had his eye on A. W. Franks of the British Museum as a possible curator,94 and Robinson was as yet an unknown quantity as scholar and connoisseur. So luck may have played a part. Robinson's appointment was of inestimable benefit to the development of the museum, and in the short term it must have relieved Cole of part of his workload and enabled him to move on to other matters. Robinson was set to work on re-arranging the museum during the summer vacation.95

In the later part of the year Cole escaped from his office quite frequently. After settling the family for their holiday at Farmingham in August, and spending some time with them in September, he made a tour of art schools in Scotland (7-15 September), and then proceeded to Belfast and Dublin, returning on the 28 September. In October (2o-26) he made a tour with Redgrave in the Midlands, which included a visit to Paxton at Chatsworth. In November (17-22) he toured to Birmingham, Worcester and Cheltenham. He had a more relaxed mode of life at home, for his diaries frequently record him playing at chess, draughts, dominoes and whist with his children in the evenings. And he found more time for serious reading, studying Newman ('something very novel to be able to read a book quiety rug Ruskin  Jea Paul Rich ucatin. Hower, the raised its head from time to time, especially in regard to two matters: Prince Albert's burgeoning South Kensington project, and the forthcoming international o attention in $\tt { I 8 5 4 }$

\* \*

Most of the land needed in South Kensington had been purchased by the 185 1 commissioners by the start of 1853. In August 1853 the prince sought ideas for the overall planning of the site from several architects: T. L. Donaldson, James Pennethorne, and C. R.Cockerell. Cole intervened with a pamphlet in which he argued that the 'promotion of Institutions of Science and Art at Kensington' should be undertaken 'rather by the public themselves than by Government'. This was his most focussed statement of faith in 'private enterprise' as against the civil service, but it does not seem to have had any effect on events.9 In the early months of 1854, Cole and Redgrave were once more drawn into discussions with Prince Albert and Edgar Bowring, secretary to the 185 1 commissioners, on how to lay out the site, and they produced a plan of their own. After this, however, the matter went off the boil, until it was brought up again in 1855.100

The museum continued to expand. No doubt Robinson took care of smaller acquisitions (which, he reported enthusiastically, were 'literally of daily occurrence'),101 but Cole had to lead when large collections were in question  and two became available in 18 54. One was the Gherardini Collection of models in wax and terracotta said to be by Michelangelo, Donatello and other Italian Renaissance sculptors. Partly through the agency of William Dyce (who lobbied Cole on 27 March, and proved to be 'jealous ab[ou]t the Department'),102 these had been offered to the nation by Madame Gherardini, who was in London striving for the best price.103 Gladstone, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, was involved in discussions about the sale,104 and presumably took the final decision to provide the money, but in principle the decision to acquire was taken by a procedure that well exemplifies Cole's challengingly unorthodox methods. Right at the start, in a minute dated 2 November 1852, he had laid down that proposed acquisitions should be exhibited in the museum before purchase, so that the public could express a view both as to their 'desirableness' and 'the reasonableness of the prices'.105 Accordingly the Gherardini models were put on show for a month from March 14, to elicit 'from the public and the artists of this country' (as Robinson carefully put it in an introduction to the accompanying catalogue) 'such an expression of opinion, as to their value and authenticity, as will justify the purchase or the rejection of the collection'6 In later times, the authenticity of most of the pieces has come to be doubted, but the collection was acquired.

Later in the year, Ralph Bernal's collection came on the market, after his death on 26 August. Cole knew the collection from his visit on 18 April the previous year, but everyone knew it: it was the only English private collection of decorative arts that could compare with those of France, and it was said to be of superb quality. Cole, Redgrave, Robinson and their adviser, the dealer John Webb, examined the collection on 2o November, and Cole noted that 'the greater part if not all ought to be secured for the nation'. He sought Prince Albert's support and on I 5 December was 'summoned to Windsor' to discuss the matter.107 He rallied the Society of Arts to the cause, and they sent a petition to Parliament on 23 February $\mathrm { ~ \tt ~ I ~ } 8 5 5$ .Meanwhile, however, A. W. Franks of the British Museum was also in pursuit of the collection, and gained the support of his trustees, who also applied to the government for money. In the event, the government did not purchase the entire collection, which had been offered by Bernal's heirs at $\scriptstyle \mathcal { L } _ { 5 0 , \textnormal { O O O } }$ , but let it go to sale at Christie's and gave grants to both national museums: £12,ooo to the museum at Marlborough House and $\scriptstyle { \mathcal { L } } _ { 4 , 0 0 0 }$ to the British Museum. Gladstone also ordered that Marlborough House should not bid for any item more than the price put on it in the marked catalogue, a very disabling restriction, keenly felt by Robinson who took charge of the matter while Cole was in France. Robinson wrote to him:

With all my endeavours, and I have left no stone unturned, we shall not be able to spend more than from seven to eight thousand pounds. The British Museum has done better being unfettered - they have spent every farthing. Mr Franks and I have all throughout worked together with utmost harmony - because, following implicitly your directions, I have always ceded to him immediately. Our losses in that direction have been rather trying.

Nonetheless, both the museums were greatly enriched from the Bernal sale.

These successes for the museum may have compensated somewhat for unsatisfactory conditions in the department, where Cole found the partnership with Playfair increasingly uncomfortable. So indeed did Cardwell, who described himself as 'Phaeton having to drive two Spirited Steeds'. 108 Cole's strategy seems to have been to ensure that he kept a finger in every pie in the department. He did not want to be confined to art matters while Playfair built up a rival scientific empire. He was, then, gratified when Playfair agreed on 14 March that the department 'sh[oul]d be worked as a unity'. There was, nonetheless, a public perception that "Mr Cole & Dr Playfair" represented Art & Science'. 109 Cole seems to have lobbied Northcote and Trevelyan 'to have two Secretaries abolished for one', and was no doubt pleased when Sir Charles Barry, discussing plans for South Kensington, undertook to suggest that Science & Art be disunited permanently' 110 The joint management had to go on, however. Cole submitted a letter of resignation to Cardwell on 5 July $[ 8 5 4$ ,but was talked out of it. Perhaps one factor that made the situation more bearable was that Playfair's responsibilities seem to have sat rather lightly on him. Redgrave told Cole that on one occasion Playfair proposed to go on holiday since 'there is nothing to do so we may as well be away'. To which Redgrave added resentfully, 'I know I find plenty'.111

Cole' dissatisfaction with 'two Secretarie & divided responsibility'boileover in December $8 5 4$ and he submitted another letter of resignation. Cardwell again tried to soothe him, and wished me to write to him my grievances fully & he w[oul]d see how far they could be redressed & what better working of the Depet  o  te f I have felt in the present working of the Division of $\mathrm { A r t } ^ { \prime }$ on 30 December. The departmental structure, he protested, was 'contrary to those principles of administration which I have always advocated. The absence of a clear line of command confused everybody. 'Elements of insubordination are created, and it is due not to the system, but to the singular forbearance of the several officers towards each other, and their mutual confidence and resolution to do the work somehow, that the Department has not become an arena of contest and confusion' He came to a thunderous conclusion:

The system of Administration in the Department which allows scarcely anything to be done, without the signatures of Accountant, Financial Clerk, Registrar, Art Superintendnt, Secretary, and President, leads inevitably to . .  torpidity, and to aconstant timidity o action andistrust o the powers on the part of te Secetari, which deprives the publicof the beneft of talents which they may possess: individual energy and responsibility are paralyzed. It is uffcent if the machine simply goes . . . . The end will be disgrace and failure; torpidity will be embodied in the Department, the whole spirit of which should be active progression, limited only by the annual votes of Parliament, and constantly alert in responding to public wants for extended and improved art instruction.113

Redgrave began the new year of 1855 with apprehensions that Cole was about to accept an offer from Sir Joseph Paxton to become manager of the Crystal Palace in Sydenham. 114 But Cardwell obviously decided that something must be done, and on 26 January 185 5 the department was reorganised. After Playfair's arrival, Redgrave's position, originally joint head of the department with Cole, had been redefined (on 27 April 1853) as inspector for art, and he was effectively in charge of day-to-day art business. Now Sir Henry de la Beche, as 'Director of School of Science', was to assume a similar responsibility in respect of day-to-day scientific business. Playfair was to become sole secretary of the department, and MacLeod, now called registrar, was to attend boards on his behalf in his absence. Cole, retaining supervision of the museum and now adding to that supervision of the Art Library (for R. N. Wornum had resigned) was to be 'Chief Inspector' or, as he came to be called 'Inspector-General'. 11s This arrangement was no less of a muddle than what had prevailed before. Cole later recalled that, nonetheless, 'understanding one another, we have gone on, according to our own instincts as it were. Playfair, although called Secretary, has been professional Adviser, whilst I, called Inspector-General, without duties of administration, have chiefly administered'.116 In the end, it did not matter greatly, because for much of $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 \varsigma _ { 4 }$ and all of 185 5 Cole was engaged in administering the British contribution to the Paris International Exhibition, and the department had to take care of itself.

The French ambassador had announced the forthcoming exhibition in April 1853 to the Foreign Office, which asked the Board of Trade to give it the 'widest publicity'. 117 Cole duly circulated all the 185 1 exhibitors on 1 June. But before this, following his usual strategy, he raised the matter at the Society of Arts, on 25 May, and a committee was formed. Further announcements emanated from France, notably the news that this exhibition was to have a fine arts section, and these were transmitted by the department. By the end of 1853, though, Cole could only note in his diary, on I December: 'No progress with arrangements for Exhibition'.

Things began to move in 1854. On 14 January Cole, who must have been working at practicalities, told Cardwell that the cost of organising a British section in the exhibition would be £7o,ooo. Cardwell was 'alarmed'. He confirmed on I 1 February that the Department of Science and Art should organise the British section, but three days later proposed a budget of £2o,ooo. After some weeks of inactivity, Cole complained, on 13 April, to his ally Lord Granville, president of the council, that Cardwell was 'wavering', and Granville promised that he would "see to it, but did not want his name introduced'. Cole also tried to stir up the 18 5 1 commissioners, though in the event they did not need to become involved. 118 Cole and Redgrave visited Paris on 23 to 27 April, to find out from the British ambassador what was going on. Cardwell began to come round. On 5 May he still 'had no confidence at all that the Paris Exhibition w[oul]d succeed', but thought 'we ought to do our best and spend even 5o,ooo£'. At last, on 19 May, he announced that he had secured government approval for the project. That very day Cole sent a minute to the Treasury requesting £50,o0o, which was granted on 26 May. Cole sprang into action.

He must have already done some groundwork in energising voluntary bodies, and encouraging the setting up of committees of manufacturers representing various trades and many towns throughout the country. The next stage was to "'ascertain by personal inquiries in the manufacturing districts . . . the willingness of producers to exhibit', as he told the Treasury.119 He started to stump the country on 22 June, visiting Coventry, where he was disconcerted to find himself ignored because the Godiva Fair was taking place. However, the mayor of Coventry got some manufacturers together the next day, and Cole went on to Birmingham, Wolverhampton, Lichfield, Stoke, Macclesfield and Sheffield, arousing enthusiasm for the exhibition. He undertook further provincial tours in the course of the year. And he travelled frequently to France.

This French adventure caused him to alter his domestic arrangements. Because he would have to spend much of 1855 in Paris, he decided to move his family to Boulogne, half way between Paris and London. This upheaval came quite soon after the birth of the Coles' ninth and last child, Granville Buller, on 5 January; Marian was now 42. Cole and Marian went to Boulogne on 6-9 April to find a house - even before it was finally confirmed that he was to run the British section at the exhibition  and the children went out there on 18 April. The house in Kensington Terrace was given up, Cole having set up a pied-a-terre in Gore House, which the department was now renting from the 185 1 commissioners. He slept there for the first time on 16 February. The second half of 1854 was a whirl, as Cole shuttled between Paris, London and the English provinces, with interludes to see his family at Boulogne.

$$
a _ { n } ^ { 4 } = \frac { 3 ^ { 4 } } { 4 ^ { 4 } } \times \frac { 1 + n } { 4 ^ { 4 } }
$$

Although an attempt had been made to ease some of the tensions in the department by reorganisation, there was also friction in the executive committee that ran the British section of the Paris exhibition. Cole, Redgrave and Playfair were at the head of this, and its secretary was Cole's close friend, Captain Henry Owen, who had helped with the Great Exhibition and had, since 18 February 1852, been an inspector of schools in the department.1 Cardwell took to doing exhibition busines directly with Owen, rather than with the other three senior officers, which put them nu on secondment froin the army, decided in January 1855 to go back to soldiering, in orr t ohis it or his coy ihen WarThis wasot the ny y i which the war affected Cole. Lord Aberdeen's coalition government fell on 29 January 185 5, after losing a vote of censure upon its feeble conduct of the war, and a Liberal government under Palmerston took over on 16 February. The prosecution of the war under Aberdeen had been chiefly in the hands of the Peelites, who were now discredited; and Cardwell, among others, stepped down on 23 February. He was succeeded as president of the Board of Trade by the vice-president, Lord Stanley, and Robert Lowe came in as the new vice-president. So, although the political complexion of the government was little changed, Cole had to adjust to the personalities of his new masters. The Crimean War must have been on everybody's mind throughout 185 5: Cole and his colleagues in Paris would have thought about it constantly and perhaps guiltily, but they might have remembered Prince Albert's comment when he gave the Paris project his blessing on 17 May 1854. With the war in mind, he said he hoped that the exhibition would be carried out well, 'as we were spending so much in destruction we ought to spend in Construction'.

Henry Owen was replaced on the exhibition team by a fellow Royal Engineer, Captain Francis Fowke (plate 36). After the exhibition, he was taken on by Cole's department, as were several others recruited for the Paris project: George Francis Duncombe and William Matchwick, colleagues of Cole from the record service, who became departmental clerks; Richard Thompson, son of Cole's old friend John Thompson, the wood-engraver, who in due course became an assistant director of the South Kensington Museum; and Philip Owen (plate 38). The latter was Henry Owen's younger brother; he became Cole's right-hand man, and eventually succeeded him as director of the South Kensington Museum.

The first stage of the team's work was to push paper around. They carefully bound up afterwards all the official forms and announcements that they sent out all over the country to attract exhibitors. 122 It was also necessary to set up a base in Paris. Cole went prospecting in early November 1854, and found a house at 14 rue du Cirque. When this was reported to Cardwell on 14 November, he cautioned that 'it should not be made too much of Club for Exhibitors'. Cole regarded it as a 'bureau',123 and that was how it was announced in a circular: a place to supply information about the price and availability of English products. 124 Nonetheless, the renting of the house fuelled suspicions that the organisers of the British section in Paris were simply bent on pleasure, rather than devoting themselves to official duties.125

By early 18 5 5 there was a provisional list of exhibitors,126 and goods could start to travel to Paris, where installation was supposed to take place between 15 January and i 5 March. Travel seems to have gone reasonably smoothly, but installation was a struggle. There were three main sites. The Palais de l'Industrie was built as a permanent hall for this and future exhibitions, but it at once proved too small, so a very long thin Annexe was built along the bank of the Seine nearby, the two buildings being joined by a covered way. The fine art section was in a third building not far away in the Avenue Montaigne.

On examining this last building the British contingent were at once alarmed. The 'huge timber and paper construction', as Redgrave described it, was 'separated only by two feet from a sugar refinery!—that most dangerous of manufactures; and the French do not even think it necessary to insure!' 'It seems overwhelming', lamented Redgrave, 'just as one is working fourteen hours a day, and serving upon committees, sometimes until ten o'clock at night.'127 Cole, however, was not overwhelmed by things like this. He set to and bothered the French (earning the designation 'ce terrible Cole')128 until they built, between the refinery and the exhibition hall, "a wall of great length, eet high, twering above both building

Redgrave set up the British fine art display. He was very glad that he had brought a gang of English workmen to help him. French labourers worked a seven-day week, but 'very easily', with a mid-day break, whereas 'our driving, reckless work for six days is far more than equal to their seven ... two Englishmen are worth three Frenchmen'. Redgrave himself supervised the hang of the British pictures, repelling with 'polite firmness' French attempts to push them into bad positions. He was surprised that the French officials left theirhang to the carpenters.30

The other buildings were, not unpredictably, behind schedule, so that exhibitors were held up and had to insert their exhibits as best they could. In this task they depended on French labourers. There were no cranes, so crates had to be unloaded from trucks either by human muscle-power or by the force of gravity.

If too heavy . . . to move, the packages were slid down a plank, and no precautions were taken to break the orc  theconcussion on reaching th round. I very heavy inded, the packages were unceremoniously thrust from the wagons. Packages of several tons in weight were thus unloaded. The damage done through this cause was very great; the loss to English exhibitors by breakage of glass alone amounting to several hundred pounds.131

The British found that space had been allotted to them in eight different spots in the Palais and the Annexe. There was only one entrance to the Annexe, at one end, and most of the British space was three-quarters of a mile away at the other end, so that many British crates had to be 'carried, or wheeled on trucks, the whole length of the building through the space allotted to other countries . . . to the great annoyance of our neighbours and with inconvenience to ourselves'. When the exhibits had been removed from the crates, the crates had to be taken all the way out again. Two weeks before the intended opening date, 1 May, two new ventilating tunnels were ploughed through the Palais, entailing considerable last-minute disruption132

Everything was so behindhand that the opening was suddenly postponed until 1 May, to the horror of all the foreigners who had booked their hotel rooms in anticipation of an opening on 1 May. When the exhibition did open, with a ceremony presided over by the emperor and empress, it was stil far from finished. 'Skilfullydisposed hangings hid deal counters and carpenter's tools' even in the central part, while elsewhere 'here and there certain stalls, if we may cal them so, display their contents, wholly or partially arranged .., standing amidst a wilderness of ye unopened packing cases'. However, the nave presented a 'gay effect', with a series of eye-catchers:

T h great lighthouse ornamented with Gerome's allegories of the maritime towns; the Eglih, Frecan rusi atury;the reat.Gobai gass;ebeu tiful carved altars; the French and Belgian church sculpture; the mysterious transit circle from Greenwich . . .; the Bohemian glass; the Berlin castings; the great carved birdcage; Osler's huge crystal candelabrum. . .133

The exhibition was inevitably compared with the 1851 Great Exhibition, and, predictably, there were widely varying views. One critic confessed to 'disappointment' when he remembered the Crystal Palace; he thought the French exhibition merely 'a hue bazar yiother cou muc  prai, wever  e solid construction of the Palais, which 'has enabled the architect to construct spacious staircases of solidmaterials and noble landing-places of great architectural beauty'15

The exhibits at the 1851 and 1855 exhibitions were also compared. One critic (and a taste reformer at that) could see no difference after only four years: 'Paris labours under the misfortune of treading too closely upon the heels of its English rival.'136 Matthew Digby Wyatt, however, with his highly developed grasp of design reform theory, had no difficulty, when examining the furniture, in seeing how all the countries had moved about in the aesthetic league table since 18 5 1. 'France and England had made most progress, Austria and Tuscany had lost most ground; the Papal states, Canada, Belgium, and Hamburg amongst the Hanse Towns, had steadily improved, and . . . the remainder had neither strikingly advanced nor receded.'137

After the completion of the installation of the exhibition during 'a long, cold srig' there might have seemed to be some prospect  relaxation or Col.But there was evidently a row between him and the department in Britain about the appointment of the British jurors, which Playfair had handled at the London end. A suggestion that Playfair should change places with Cole in Paris during the summer provoked an explosion from Cole. Playfair (who said that 'my preference strongly would be not to spend a month or two in Paris') wrote a careful, diplomatic letter on 1 May, followed the next day by a private note: 'Now that the thunder cloud has burst I hope the air is more enjoyable & less sultry over the Rue de Cirque. I felt by your recent letters that a cloud was gathering but I could not in the least comprehend why.'139 Cole stayed on in Paris, but he had ruffled feathers among the French, and Playfair recorded that 'I was sent over to Paris by the Government to act as peacemaker'. 140

Later in the summer, Queen Victoria and Prince Albert paid a visit to the exhibition, also attending the usual state balls and banquets. On 17 August the British contingent waited in the road for the Queen's procession to go by. 'We resolved,' recalled Redgrave the next day, 'to give the Queen three hearty English hurrahs as she passed. Philip Owen . . . was fugleman, and right heartily we gave tongue, so much so that we all cracked our voices, and are as hoarse as frogs today.'141

The exhibition closed in November. Cole could be pleased with himself on several counts. He brought the project in under budget. On 1 5 November 1854 he had told the Board of Trade's junior minister, Lord Stanley, that he thought he could get by with only two thirds of his £ 5o,ooo budget. 'That would be a work well done,' said Stanley. Cole's expenditure in fact totalled £39,259.142 He considered that 'as a whole, the British section, although necessarily much less in quantity, more completely represented the productions of the United Kingdom and its Colonies, than the Exhibition of 18 5 1'. 143 He did not leave a detailed aesthetic critique of design in the exhibition, but Redgrave did. Repeating what he had done in 185 1, he prepared a special 'Report on the present State of Design applied to Manufacture, as shown in the Paris Universal Exhibition', in which he rehearsed the department's rules of taste, compared art education in France and England, and gave a brief critique of design in each class of exhibits. His conclusion, which Cole probably shared, was that the

Paris exhibition 'showed evidence of a great general progress in English manufactures towards good taste, and that if we are still behind France in this respect we are behind no other European nation'.144 The exhibition also fulfilled Milner Gibson's tat via French tariff restrictions were reduced during and after the exhibition, and English exports to France rose. As Cole said, 'probably no other mode of attacking successfully an obstinate prohibitive system could have been devised, to which the French would have submitted so readily and so patiently'. 146

From time to time, Cole devoted thought to the museum. He visited French collections, and noted at least once (6 September 18 54) that he and Redgrave had been visiting 'curiosity dealers to make purchases'. Towards the end of the year, Herbert Minton tipped him off about the forthcoming sale of a collection in Toulouse. Minton knew about this from his colleague Léon Arnoux, a native of Toulouse who had trained at the art school there, and in 1849 became art director at Minton's factory in Stoke-on-Trent, where he remained for the rest of his life. The collection in Toulouse had been made by a lawyer, Jules Soulages, during the 183os when he was working in Paris. He was among the pioneer generation of French collectors of the decorative arts of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and he had especially pursued Italian Renaissance material, while travelling in Italy. His collection might well be ranked alongside those of Alexandre du Sommerard, Pierre Révoil and Charles Sauvageot, and, like theirs, was celebrated among connoisseurs. As Cole would have known, Révoil's collection had been acquired by the Louvre in 1828, while du Sommerard's collection, bought by the French state in 1843, was open to the public as the Musée de Cluny, often held up before Britons as the ideal that the Marlborough House museum was striving to emulate. Sauvageot donated his collection to the Louvre in 1857, but it was still in its owner's apartment in 1855, where Cole and Redgrave saw it on 15 November, and longed to get their hands on it.147 Soulages had taken his collection with him when he retired to his birthplace, Toulouse, had kept it together, and now wanted to sel it en bloc. Thus the prospect opened before Cole of immensely strengthening the Marlborough House museum at a stroke, if he could secure this collection.

He set off on 4 October 18 5 5 to visit the collection, with his brother-in-law-to-be, Thurston Thompson, making part of the journey by boat along the great inland waterway formed by the River Garonne and the seventeenth-century Canal du Midi, which links the Atlantic to the Mediterranean and passes through Toulouse. 148 He spent twodays scruising the collectin, and orme the concusion that it was my duty to effect the purchase if possible for the nation'. Those are his own words in Fiy Years, where he adds his conviction that the collection would be of great use to manufacturers'149 Whether or not this was true, the collection certainly had immense antiquarian value, and, when he returned to work in Britain in 1856, Cole applied himself with relentless determination tosecuring it.

Heent s hei, 'ma is ndiffculLor Stany h minister, was 'very peremptory against including purchases at Toulouse in Estimates', i.in theeparte's buget, andeven Redgrave 'bjete tomy buying theToulue Mu'Rrave paps hah  y:8gust he was able el Cole that John Sheepshanks had undertaken to donate his collection of contemporary

British paintings to the museum, another substantial and important acquisition. Cole, denied support from the government for the acquisition of the Soulages collection, turned  as he was always eager to do  to private enterprise. He organised a consortium of distinguished people to loan money to a fund that would buy the collection, andoffer it to the nation at cost price; if it ultimately became necessary, the collection could be sold again to reover themoney lent.As soften, the key to Col's cmp was securing the support of Prince Albert. He undertook to subscribe £1ooo on 5 May, but insisted that his name should not appear in any transactions. Cole arranged for John Webb to value the collection and ship it back to England, for exhibition at Marlborough House. As the crates were unpacked in the autumn (disclosing, unfortunately, a few breakages, which Webb arranged to be mended),151 Cole gleefully noted (on 4 November) that the collection was 'coming out very strong'.

## \* \* \*

The Soulages collection continued to occupy Cole in 1856, and there were several other long-term issues that hovered over him as he settled back into routine work. At the very beginning of the year he was back in Boulogne, writing his report on the Paris exhibition, and obviously enjoying the opportunity to draw breath, for he writes in his diary a summary note about the pleasures of Boulogne, to cover the days up to I 1 January, when he left for England.

The Weather usually mild & clear, often very bright & Sunny. Boulogne gives walks for all Weathers. The grande Rue is always clean, & even in Wet is less wet than most streets: The ramparts for a short mile walk are excellent. The Pier is always animated. The Sands on the West are good. Then there is the Calais Road & to the Column across down land: & there is the [military] Camp an excellent walk in fine weather.

Back in Britain, his routine work was now dominated by tours to inspect schools: in Hampshire in January; in Cornwall and Devon in March; a wide sweep round the Potteries, Lancashire and Yorkshire in April; a long spell in Liverpool, followed by Wales, in June; to Alnwick and back through Lancashire, Cheshire and the Midlands in late August and early September.

After the French adventure, he had to reorganise his domestic arrangements in Britain, so that the family could return. His first move to solve this problem was to find a country cottage near enough to London for him to commute to work. On Sunday 3 February, he went to visit his cousin Philip Jacob at Stoke Fields near Guildford, and on Monday Mrs Jacob took him to look at Elm Cottage (plate 39) in the pretty old village of Shere, in a winding valley between Guildford and Dorking. The parish of Shere, Cole was later to record,

contains under 1,5oo inhabitants, many of whom live among the sand-hills at a distance from the little place, which, although within 3o miles of the metropolis, yield even blackcock to the sportsman, and once on a time gave cover to the Sussex smuggler, before the dawn of free trade. It has a church with architecture beginning with the Normans (I am not sure that a Saxon bit or two might not be found left in the tower), besides offering specimens of all the broad divisions of English architecture down to the days of modern church-wardenism.152

Cole liked the cottage, and on 18 February agreed to rent it for 5 years at £3o a year. Four days later Redgrave helped him choose wallpapers at Woollams in Marylebone, and on the weekend of 5-6 April Richard Thompson helped him move his furniture in. The family arrived the following week and lived here through the summer, Cole travelling up to town most days by train.153

At this time Cole took up photography, and made a series of photographs of the cottage, both its exterior and, more interestingly, its interior.154 These are preserved in an album called 'Marian F. Cole's Scrap Book', now in the V&A. They reveal (albeit in monochrome) Cole's taste in wallpapers, and the way the cottage was comfortably filled with pictures and bibelots, including some Felix Summerly art-manufactures. Also included are Cole's daughters and his servants, in informal, domestic poses (plate 4o). They must have had to stay still for the necessarily long exposures, but the photographs are as near to "snapshots' as was then possible.

A near neighbour in the country was Henry Drummond, a wealthy and eccentric Member of Parliament, who lived in the hall at Albury, the next village. Cole made friends with him, and the family often walked in his park. Drummond's principal achievement in life was as a founder and leader of the Catholic Apostolic Church. This was a millenarian sect, but unlike most such bodies, equipped itself with liturgy and ceremonial closely modelled on those of the Roman Catholic Church. Since it anticipated the imminent end of the world, it adopted no procedure for ordaining clergy in the future. As a result it still exists as a secular body, with property including several architecturally distinguished churches, but, having no priesthood, is virtually unable to function as a religious body. Cole attended Drummond's Catholic Apostolic church at Albury on Whit Sunday, 1 1 May 1856, taking note of the lighted lamps (a special feature of the sect's ritual), incense, chants, priests 'in dresses', and the practice of speaking with tongues (another special feature). In respect of the architecture and accoutrements, he observed, characteristically: 'ornament not very correct'.

Drummond was one of his coadjutors in a scheme to ginger up the local peasantry. A meeting was held on 5 November 1856, at which (Cole noted in his diary) Drummond was 'very droll'. Cole enlarged on this in Fifty Years. To begin with there was a polite contention over who should take the chair. The local vicar proposed Drummond, but he magnificently riposted, 'No, no, every cock on his own dunghill, so the vicar had to preside. Cole outlined his plans for a 'Labourers' Improvement Society', which would hold an annual country show. This provoked Drummond to deride the name 'Labourers' Improvement Society', mischievously surmising that the labourers might respond by creating a 'Landlords' Improvement Society', to improve 'us' and 'other classes who want improvement'. Nonetheless, he offered to help. The name was tactfully changed to the 'Tillingbourne Yearly Holiday Association', after the stream that ran through the village, and plans were laid for action in theesuing summer.155

Cole's trips round the country to inspect schools no doubt reassured him that his art education machine was ticking over adequately. Indeed, he would have been pleased to find that the system, intended to be so foolproof as to enable drawing tuition to be given even by teachers who could not practise the skill they imparted, acoming upo epectations. In Birigham  anuary he note: fairly taught by a willing master who c[oul]d not draw himself?.

In his first five years at the head of his department, Cole had established his authority, despite some organisational turbulence; had set up a nation-wide art education system and an innovative museum; and had repeated his triumph of $^ \textrm { T } 8 5 \ : \mathrm { I } \ : ,$ albeit on a smaller scale, by supervising the British part of the Paris exhibition in $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 5 5$ .But there was to be no resting on his laurels. He was aware that two big issues were looming over the department. As early as 24 January $^ \textrm { I } 8 5 6 ,$ Lord Granville, who, as president of the council, was in charge of the Education Department, warned him that owing to changes taking place in that department, it seemed likely that it and the Department of Science and Art would soon be 'united'. An order in council, on 25 February, confirmed the government's intention to pursue this policy. 156 However, it was not until the end of the year that further progress was made in this direction. The other looming issue was the impending removal of the department to South Kensington.

The move to South Kensington had emerged as a policy during 18 5 5. Once the South Kensington site had been secured by the 185 1 commissioners, Prince Albert tried to induce various institutions to set up their quarters there.' The National Gallery was his prime choice; and he also wanted almost roo learned societies to relocate on the site, as proposed in the Second Report of the commissioners, published in November 1852. Even before this, on 29 February 1852, he had expressed his wish that Cole's department would also move to the site. The department, however, escaped involvement for some time, during long-drawn-out negotiations with the National Gallery, which stoutly resisted attempts to remove it from Trafalgar Square. In 1853 and again in 1855, proposals issued from the government to build a barracks on part of the South Kensington site, and this no doubt spurred Prince Albert on to plant some buildings on the empty land, at any rate on the eastern spur that was not affected by the National Gallery proposals. Here, southwest of Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, the Department of Science and Art - its offices, schools and museum  was to be accommodated.

The prince would have liked to erect buildings according to the designs of Gottfried Semper, which he had commissioned in summer 1854. Semper had acquired a considerable reputation as an architect in Dresden when the upheavals of 1848 drove him - a wanted man after defending the revolutionary barricades - to take refuge in 1849 in France and then Britain.² Although he failed to find the work he hoped for in Britain, introductions to Edwin Chadwick and Henry Cole brought him employment in a minor capacity at the Great Exhibition, designing four of the foreign stands. This stimulated him in 1852 to publish Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst, a brief treatise on 'Science, Industry and Art: proposals for the development of a national taste in art at the closing of the London Industrial Exhibition'. When Prince Albert's scheme for a new educational institution became known, he offered his services to Cole, and, as has already been mentioned, was taken on to teach classes at the School of Design. In his lectures he explored ideas that were eventually to be expounded at length in Der Stil (186o-63). Cole had previously commissioned him to produce what was at first described as a 'catalogue raisonné of specimens of metal work for [the] Museum'' If the department hoped to obtain an acquisition 'wish-list' in the field of metalwork, or even a history of the metalworker's craft, it was disappointed, for Semper in fact produced a rambling, but exceedingly learned, treatise on museology. Semper hoped that the department would publish this, but his hopes were disappointed. A manuscript remains in the National Art Library (and another in the Austrian decorative arts museum in Vienna).

Semper eventually came to feel that his prospects would be better in a now more peaceful Europe, and resigned on 25 August 1855, when offered a professorship in Zurich.4 He went on to gain such an immense European reputation that some historians have assumed that he must have exercised a powerful influence upon the museum at Marlborough House. His biographer, however, sees the influence passing in the other direction, considering that Semper's spell in Britain 'transformed his life and brought him into contact with groups of people who, long after this association had ended, continued to influence his intellectual outlook' If Semper seems, then, to have made little impression, it is all the more worth noting that when Cole attended Semper's first lecture on 20 May 18 53, he noted in his diary that it was 'thoughtful & suggestive' Since Cole's diary entries are so very laconic, and so rarely deal with anything but practical matters, this entry may be interpreted as indicating some intellectual affinity between him and the German theorist. Semper might have left a solid legacy of bricks and mortar in South Kensington if his plans for a museum, commissioned by Prince Albert, had been carried out, but, when they were costed in summer 1855, they proved far too expensive. Prince Albert, as Redgrave reported to Cole, was disappointed not to be able to use Semper's plans, for he was 'urgent to do something at Kensington'.6

For want of anything better, a temporary iron building was run up, and in 1856 Cole was much involved in planning how the exhibits were to be installed. He did not like the iron building, but welcomed the prospect of expansion on the new site. Others, such as Robinson, were against the move to South Kensington.7 In Robinson's case this may well have been because he knew that the art museum would there be joined, perhaps even be obscured, by other collections. The development of the site purchased by the 185 1 commissioners was bound to be determined by their wishes in the matter  or rather, by the wishes of their chairman, Prince Albert. In their Second Report in 1852 they had outlined Prince Albert's scheme for South Kensington, and their Third Report, dated 12 April 1856, showed how implementation of it was proceeding. Progress was less advanced in devising teaching institutions than in the assembly of museum collections, which were at first conceived as accessories to the educational business of Prince Albert's 'Industrial University'. The shape of the collections was derived from the philosophical framework that the prince had conceived for the 185 1 exhibition. He divided the material to be shown there into four categories: (1) Raw Materials, which were transformed by (2) Machinery into (3) Manufactured Products, to which extra grace and value could be given by the application of (4) Fine Arts. As we know, this scheme was overlaid, for reasons of practicality, by a classification system in 3o sections, devised by Playfair. But, as Playfair remarked, 'the philosophical mind of the Prince Consort held tenaciously' to his scheme,8 and it re-emerged as the basis of the South Kensington project. Thus museum collections were sought in each of the four categories.

It became clear even in the course of the commissioners' Second Report (pp.3o-3 1) that Raw Materials and Manufactures could conveniently be grouped together, since raw materials were not very interesting unless you could see what was made from them. The commissioners further decided to divide raw materials and manufactures into three long-accepted categories: animal, vegetable and mineral. A collection of mineral materials and products already existed in the Museum of Practical Gology in Jermyn Street (which, being under the command of the Department of Science and Art, was pretty well within the grasp of the commissioners); and there was a collection of vegetable materials and products in the Museum of Economic Botany at Kew Gardens, which might, it was hoped, be incorporated in the South Kensington project. Since no collection of animal materials and products existed, the Society of Arts had encouraged its member (and secretary, 1852-3), Edward Solly, to create one in 1853. Exhibited in 1855, it had then been handed on to the commissioners with a view to its inclusion in the South Kensington project. A collection of machinery was annexed to the project when Prince Albert in 18 5 2 enjoined Bennet Woodcroft, assistant to the commissioners of patents, to form one.

The commissioners' Third Report describes other collections that had been drawn into the project: an educational collection, first formed by the Society of Arts as a special exhibition in 1854, and a 'Domestic Economy' collection shown by Thomas Twining at the Paris 1855 exhibition. This latter consisted of "those useful or necessary articles, which from their cheapness, appropriateness, and good workmanship are calculated to diffuse comfort in the dwellings of the humbler classes of the community, and tend to promote their physical well-being and intellectual development' (p.38). Art collections were to be supplied (since the National Gallery would not cooperate) by the Museum of Ornamental Art in Marlborough House. In addition, the Architectural Museum, a private body, had opened negotiations with Redgrave in autumn 1854 for space in the iron building for their collection of plaster casts of architectural detail and sculpture.9

There had been discussions about some of these collections in 1855: for instance, on I 2 July Playfair wrote to Cole to report 'rather a hot day yesterday in the Council of the Soc[iet]y of Arts' when the 'ultimate destination of the Trade Museum' was acrimoniously discussed. On Cole's return from Paris, he was entrusted with the task of putting the South Kensington museum together and got further involved with w   hcll since the Treasury was averse to putting money into South Kensington. At a meeting with hostile Treasury officials on 1 April, he was asked about 'Patents, Trades Mus; & Educat: Museum' and airily said that they 'were mere ideas at present'. He did take the opportunity, however, to argue that a move to more spacious quarters would benefit the Museum of Ornamental Art.

Assembling the new museum would be a physical task of some complexity. At the Great Exhibition the army had supplied manpower in the form of soldiers (Sappers') commanded by the Royal Engineers. The same expedient was adopted for South Kensington: the Department of Science and Art's Board requisitioned Sappers from the War Office on 1 2 July 1856.11 Cole had valued the assistance at the Paris exhibition of Captain Francis Fowke (an officer of the Royal Engineers), and had kept him on the payroll. On 22 September Fowke told Cole that he would prefer to throw in his lot with South Kensington, 'taking all risks', rather than return to the army, and on 29 November he was appointed architect and engineer to the department.12 Down on the South Kensington site, the new iron building was finished by the autumn, though on 22 September Cole noted that it was letting in the rain in 26 places. Still gently decaying on the site was a group of domestic buildings, once Brompton Park House and now subdivided into three dwellings. These were to be used for offices and for the Art School. To augment them, some wooden huts  which had been in use by the students at Somerset House - were re-erected in South Kensington. To link up the iron building and the old houses a new building (the junction') was projected; it would contain an entrance hall, library and lecture room as well as offices. This was cheaply designed in brick by James Pennethorne, and was completed early in $\mathtt { I 8 5 7 }$ A building containing refreshment rooms - an innovation in the museum world  was approved by Prince Albert on New Year's Eve, and finished in May $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 \varsigma _ { 7 }$ Yet another new building was wrung out of the reluctant government when John Sheepshanks donated his picture collection: the terms of this generous gift required in response the provision of a suitable building to house it. It was begun on 25 November 1856, and was ready when the new museum opened in 1857.

Since Cole's life was clearly about to be entwined with South Kensington, he set about looking for a house there, and on 18 December he and the family moved into 24 Onslow Square, not far from the museum. On Christmas Day, which was foggy, they had a big family party, with a magic lantern show and charades. Living here brought Cole into closer touch with Thackeray, who lived at number 36 from 1855 until 1862. 'A pleasant, bowery home', wrote his daughter Annie; 'our windows look out upon the elm trees of Onslow Square.'13 Thackeray and Cole were old friends, and so were the daughters of each family, who had played together when Thackeray lived in Young Street and the Coles at 1, The Terrace, Kensington High Street. Annie Thackeray later recalled the lanes of Kensington, "along which we used to go for straggling walks on early summer mornings with our playfellows, the Coles, who lived in the terrace close by. We used to start about six o'clock and bring home branches of hawthorn blossom to decorate our school-rooms and to remind us that it was May time.'14 At the start of 1857, Thackeray's two daughters, Annie and Minnie, were aged 19 and 16, of an age with the Cole girls, Laetitia or 'Tishy'(18), Henrietta or 'Hennie'(17), and Mary (I 5). Cole's diaries show that the families often visited each other or went walking together in Hyde Park, or to concerts. On the evening of 24 May, Cole took the Thackeray girls round the soon-to-be-opened museum in the dark. By this time the Coles were at 17 Onslow Square. Their lease of number 24 must have been a short one, for in early April Cole, lodging at 6 Pelham Villas, had had to hunt for a replacement. On January I 3 Cole acquired a new brother-in-law in the shape of Thurston Thompson, John Thompson's son, who married Marian's sister, Charlotte Bond, at Kensington Church. A large delegation of the Cole family was present, and the wedding breakfast was held at the Coles' house.

## \* \* \*\*

At the museum in Marlborough House, a last hurrah was raised with the display of the Soulages collection, from 5 December 1856 until 3 1 January 1857. The catalogue of the collection, by J. C. Robinson, contained an introduction signed by the three managers of the fund, Dudley Coutts Marjoribanks, company director, Matthew Uzielli, collector, and Cole. Presumably it was the latter who wrote it. It announced that, as with the Gherardini collection, the Soulages objects were loaned to the museum so that the public could decide whether they should be purchased. 'Whether the nation acquires the collection or not, is, in a pecuniary point of view, a matter of entire indifference to the subscribers of the guarantee; but they feel . . . that they have taken the most effectual means in their power of inviting the public to pass its own judgment, and of affording the Government sound evidence for its guidance.' Cole ended with a heavy hint. 'A government which represents the people, acts according to public opinion, and in this case it will probably rest in great measure with the public to decide whether or not the Soulages Collection will become the property of the Nation.'

The reaction from the public, so far as it can be gauged from press reports, was less than conclusive. On one side, The Times gave a hearty endorsement to the proposal to purchase the collection for the nation. If it were to be dispersed by sale at auction, it pointed out, 'nine-tenths of it would probably be withdrawn from the ken of those artists and manufacturers for whose special advantage it appears to have been brought to this country'. If placed permanently at Marlborough House, it would be accessible to the public along with the other treasures there, 'displayed with a zeal, liberality, and discretion which may be set in exceedingly favourable contrast to the system which has prevailed until very recently in the management of our other national collections'.15

The Morning Advertiser, however, was not so ready to applaud the museum's efforts. 'It is to be hoped that this country is not about to be inoculated with the fantastic fancy for bijouterie and trifling for which Continental Courts and Governments are so trivially conspicuous.' It conceded that the Soulages collection amounted to more than 'mere curiosities', but nonetheless asserted that 'it manifests a tendency to the revival of the barbarous, and it smacks of that relish for the ugly which is the resort of the arrogant few, who prefer notoriety and exclusiveness to art and beauty'.16 The Morning Chronicle also revealed some doubts: it considered, expressing its anguish through tortured syntax, that the collection would 'on the score of curiosity, be a very desirable, though not when viewed purely in an artistic light, a very valuable addition' to the museum. It felt that the objects 'sin too grossly against the canons of art to afford any great amount of pleasure to a mind of cultivated taste, or be of considerable benefit to a student of art'.17 In contrast, the Monthly Review was impressed by the many names of manufacturers on the subscription list, and accepted the argument that the collection would be useful to Bsh    c and methods, to the modern processes and arts connected with daily life'.18 Household Words shrewdly advised its readers to 'watch the visitors and listen to their comments. You will find that the raptures come from the connoisseurs', while ordinary people think that the collection is 'more curious than beautiful'.19

So Cole's stratagem failed to elicit a ringing support from the public. In the end the prime minister decided. 'What is the use of such rubbish to our manufacturers?' asked Palmerston, and declined to put up the money.20 Cole, however, refused to be discouraged. Having seized hold of the collection through exploiting private enterprise once, he resorted again to private enterprise, with an ingenuity that he took pleasure in recording in Fifty Years. An Art Treasures Exhibition (a huge festival of the fine arts, compensating for their exclusion from the Great Exhibition) was to be held at Manchester in 1857. Cole persuaded the committee in charge of this to buy the Soulages collection for inclusion in the exhibition. After the exhibition, it was agreed, the Department of Science and Art would rent from the committee parts of thecollection to be displaye in the museum, with an option to purchase them.Col hadsotte that the eparet had enje sinc1852 sannguthory objects and pay a rental', without reference to the Treasury, so, with the support of his ministers, he was able to play this wily trick despite Treasury disapproval. The Soulages problem kept raising its head through the next two years, but ultimately Col'  w u thealel annual instalments.

The display of the Soulages collection marked the end of the museum's occupation of Marlborough House, which had not, perhaps, provided ideal accommodation. 'Uncomfortable rooms', said one critic, 'in a dismal building never adapted or intende or anything the kind. Themus cosed i doorson 7February an Cole then worked fulltilt to set up the new museum in South Kensington.

His own position in his department was improved early in $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 \varsigma >$ That the department was to move from the Board of Trade to be under the committee of the Privy Council for Education had been foreshadowed at the start of $\mathrm { ~ \tt ~ I ~ } 8 5 6 .$ but nothing much happened until late in the year. On 6 December Cole, Redgrave and Playfair composed a 'private memorandum' on how they thought things should be managed in the new dispensation. Because the education committee would be at Whitehall and the Department of Science and Art at South Kensington, they argued that a degree of independence was necessary for the department. If all science and art business had to be referred to Whitehall, this 'would be very prejudicial' to the department, because (and here Cole's voice can surely be heard) 'for a long time to come the work of the Department must be one of invention, cautious experiment, and close observation of results. It is not an office of precedent or routine, and requires the undivided attention of a mind occupied with its mode of action.'22 Cole's mind, presumably.

If the government had really seriously wanted to bring its educational affairs within the control of a single, coherent, body, it might not have been keen on the department decamping to South Kensington. But the move was Prince Albert's wish, and could not be obstructed. Northcote and Trevelyan, together with Lord Granville, as lord president of the council, were called in to advise the Treasury on the forthcoming reorganisation, and they gave Cole the authority he wanted. First, the Science and Art Department was to have closer contact with ministers than the Education Department. For the latter was ruled by a committee of the Privy Council, which included not only the lord president and vice-president of the council, but also the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Home Secretary, the president of the Local Government Board, the Secretary of State for War and the 1st Lord of the Admiralty. The Department of Science and Art was exempted from fealty to all these politicians. Its secretary was to be placed 'in direct relation with the Lord President and the Vice-President . . . without the intervention' of the committee, or of its secretary (a functionary who, Cole would have thought, had power without personal accountability, as he could always shelter behind the committee). The arrangement for the Department of Science and Art was fully in tune with Cole's belief in individual responsibility.23

Cole, it will be remembered, was at this point not the secretary of the department — Playfair had this position  but inspector general. The report, however, made a second important recommendation: that Cole should now become secretary, with Redgrave as art referee and inspector-general of art schools and Playfair as scientific referee and inspector-general of scientific schools. 'An exchange of offices' between Cole and Playfair 'would be for the public advantage'. Thus, in the game of departmental musical chairs, Cole emerged as winner, especially as the report also proposed raising his salary to £1,500.

The Department of Science and Art was henceforth ruled by a small board, which usually met weekly at South Kensington and was attended by the two ministers, the president and vice-president of the Privy Council (or often only one of them), together with the chief officers of the department. The board first met on 2 1 February 1857, and Cole recorded that the ministers - Lord Granville, with W. F. Cowper, MP, as vice-president  'seem disposed to leave details to us'. An ideal arrangement for Cole, therefore, but perhaps less propitious for the efficient administration of British education. Historians have regretted that 'successive governments made little or no effort to dovetail the work' of the Education Department and the Science and Art Department,24 so that these bodies remained 'joined, like Siamese twins, but separate in their operations'.25 Still, Cole was now unshakeably fixed in the saddle that he was to occupy for I 5 years. He had a little row with Richard Burchett on 6 March, and he must have felt some satisfaction at recording in his diary what he said to him: Told him plainly that so long as I continued at the Dept I intended to be Supreme in the Management.'

Criss-crossing the country to inspect schools now ceased to be part of Cole's job. The first half of 1857 he spent in shuttling between the Mall and South Kensington, as the installation of the new museum proceeded. On January 8 he was in the iron building with his team, Redgrave, Robinson, Fowke and Richard Thompson, to 'settle Museum points of Arrangement'. On 5 February, he, Robinson and Thompson were 'trying experiments in Colour on the Partitions'. The different sections of the museum were colour-coded for the sake of clarity, as the first guidebook points out, but wot  whi cr wo.ieny eat t up of the various sections to appropriate curators. He discussed the machinery section with Bennet Woodcroft on 9 February, and on 3 May 'called on Robinson & settled with him Arrangement of his part' of the Art Museum, where Cole had begun setting out purchases from the Paris exhibition on 1 5 April. On 7 May he looked at the Sheepshanks pictures, which had arrived in the museum the previous day and were Redgrave's special responsibility. On 12 January Richard Thompson, who had won his spurs at the Paris exhibition in 1855, was appointed to arrange the educational section (at £25 a month, with a competent assistant at £3 a week).26 He eventually became keeper of the education, food and animal products collections in 1859.27

The museum was to be provided with gas lighting to make it possible to open in the evening. Experiments were made on 3 March and 2 April, and on 29 April there was a demonstration for Prince Albert, the two ministers, and other notables. Gas lightin was istalle in the Sheeshanks gllery  1 June,the paine havig d work there only on 6 June. A lighting demonstration was provided for the press on

19 June, and Cole was quite surprised at how many reporters turned up. Whether they realised it or not, this was the first time in the world that a museum had been equipped with lighting. In setting up security arrangements, Cole consulted Panizzi of the British Museum about warding there, on 12 February. At South Kensington the galleries were to be warded at first by his detachment of Sappers, and on 21 February the board applied to the War Office for four more men and a subaltern. In return for working at the museum, the Sappers were to be taught architectural and freehand drawing, and photography, which would help them in their duties when they eventually eurne t he Royal Engines. On May  Cole made n rement with the General Omnibus Company that omnibuses would stop at the museum every half hour.

Among its visitor services, he was determined that the museum should have refreshment rooms. These had been provided to general satisfaction at the Great Exhibition, so it seemed appropriate to try them at South Kensington. Prince Albert, as chairman of the 185 1 commissioners, had 'settled to have refreshment rooms' on 29 December 18 56, and two days later Cole and Fowke presented plans to him which he promptly approved. The commissioners met on 14 February and agreed to take responsibility for the work. Cole noted that they decided to 'keep the management as I proposed in their own hands'. This was no doubt a speedier way of operating than involving the government, but it backfired on Cole, because, when the rapidly erected building was finished, the Office of Works objected that its timber construction had infringed the Metropolitan Building Act.29 The answer was for the commissioners to hand it over to the government, which was exempt from these building regulations.30 Thus, in opening the museum, Cole had to use his customary ingenuity in tackling a range of problems. No doubt he felt well rewarded when the Chancellor of the Exchequer toured the museum ("hastily') on 2 June, said that there had been great economy and that there was much to show for the money expended, and paid tribute to the 'organizing head' that had controlled the project.

The name 'South Kensington Museum' was officially adopted by the board on 21 May. Lord Granville had already, on Thursday 23 May, approved Cole's suggestion that the museum should open with a private view. Cole occupied the next Sunday morning drafting a justification for a 'Formal opening', by which he presumably meant a royal visit. Prince Albert paid an informal visit with the Prince of Wales and Prince Alfred on 8 June, and Cole was doubtless mortified to find that rain had penetrated the iron building in various places. Nonetheless, he wrote two days later to Grey, the prince's secretary, to 'urge' a royal opening. He settled the arrangements for opening the museum with Cowper on Saturday 13 June, and the next morning he was in his garden 'pondering over details of the opening'. All parties concerned in these arrangements seem to have cut it rather fine. The royal visit took place less than a week later, on the evening of Saturday 2o June, and was followed on the evening of Monday 22 by a private view, to which 2, 500 people came. Cole noted that everyone was surprised at the large number who attended: if he gave only a week's notice, perhaps this was indeed a surprising turnout. When the board met two days later, there was 'little or nothing said about [the] successful opening'. Cole doubtless noted this with some annoyance, but that evening - the first public opening on an evening - another 2,500 people came, which may have raised his spirits.

After the opening of the museum, the pace of Cole's life seems to have slowed down a little. There were some ongoing arrangements to be made (notably in relation to Bennet Woodcroft's ambition to have free admission to the Patent Museum every day), and some new initiatives, as when, on 2 1 July, the South London Railway suggested running a line to South Kensington. But the summer holiday period came round, and Cole often retreated (sometimes with paperwork to be done) to the rural calm of Shere. Here, he plunged again into the affairs of the Tillingbourne Association. He issued an 'Address to the Labouring Cottagers' in the Shere area, inviting them to submit their vegetables and fruit to the forthcoming show; also 'specimens of needlework done by grown persons, such as shirts, smockfrocks, and darning; knitting, netting, and garden work by young persons under 18 years of age; rustic work for seats, baskets, &c., for which Mr. Redgrave, R.A. has kindly consented to make some designs'.31 The first show was held on Saturday 25 July. Although basketwork designed by Redgrave seems to have been absent, there was a good display of vegetables, and 203 prizes were awarded.

Back at South Kensington after the vacation, Cole was occupied sometimes by day-to-day administration (such as inquiring into the theft of an ivory barometer from the animal products collection)32 and sometimes by advance planning for the commissioners' South Kensington site. Here the main expanse (usually referred to as the 'quadrangle') still lay undeveloped, for Prince Albert and his circle continued to hope that the National Gallery could be re-housed there. But a royal commission reported against their proposal in July, and it seemed as if they must acknowledge defeat. Cole was eager to answer back in a pamphlet. When he proposed this to Lord Granville on 6 August, Granville advised against attacking the commission. But Cole nonetheless devoted several days of his holiday at the beginning of September to writing a pamphlet, and on 17 September sent the draft to Lord Granville, who was at Osborne. The pamphlet was published, but anonymously.33

It does not attack the commission, though in the first paragraph Cole has some lumbering fun in exposing the conflicting testimonies of various witnesses. His main argument is concerned with new accommodation for the National Gallery. The commission made suggestions for expansion on the Trafalgar Square site, which, in Cole's computation, would cost a million pounds. He suggests a solution that would cost (in his computation) only £8o,ooo. His solution has three elements. First, he suggests that the Royal Academy should vacate its part of the Trafalgar Square building, which could then be used by the National Gallery. As Cole notes, everyone recognised that this would have to happen. His other two suggestions are more controversial. One is that, 'as fresh acquisitions were obtained' by the National Gallery, its 'less valuable speies might be drafte elswhere and belent or given to povincial galleries'. To induce the National Gallery and the British Museum to share their treasures more widely was a hobbyhorse of Cole's, but he never made much progress with it. However, it could be presented as a noble, altruistic aim: in the words with which Cole concludes the pamphlet, 'a system of distribution to the provinces of superfluous specimens would be established, which would exalt the national pictures from a merely metropolitan to a truly national use'.

Clthrn ws peap otealrPut ta Nal    , and needed new accommodation, he suggested that these should go to join the Sheepshanks paintings at South Kensington, where they might form a national gallery of modern painting. This arrangement would be similar to what Cole hoped would soon be settled between South Kensington and the British Museum. The latter, he believed, had agreed to 'the separation of ancient and mediaeval or Christian art, leaving the ancient art at the British Museum, and uniting its mediaeval acquisitions with those of the Science and Art Department at Kensington'. Cole argued that his 'proposal to keep the ancient paintings distinct from the modern, as indeed they are now, is quite an analogous proceeding'. Cole did not, in fact, ever achieve the desired share-out with the British Museum. But the Turner and Vernon paintings did spend some (rather uncomfortable) years at South Kensington, within Cole's empire. The pamphlet may have contributed to this outcome.

As well as trying to tidy up the 'National Gallery question' in this way, Cole became involved in discussions on how to develop the central site in South Kensington, a matter of some urgency now that the National Gallery was no longer part of the equation. With Redgrave and Fowke, he sat down to devise plans on 15 October, continuing to work on them on 22 and 24 October, and submitting them on 3 November to Prince Albert, who 'entirely approved of the principles' and asked for them to be 'further developed'. Already in July, Cole had been investigating the possibilities of a 'Music Hall' on the site: the opening salvoes of the campaign that would lead eventually to the Royal Albert Hall.34 By the end of the year, however, little progress had been made.

So far as art was concerned, Cole kept his eye in by various means. He helped Robinson set up a 'collectors' club', which first met on 18 February, and he continued to attend its meetings.35 He went with Robinson from time to time to see works of art at dealers' or auctioneers' premises. 36 And on 16 and 18 October, he was himself scrutinising prints and drawings that had been offered to the museum for purchase. By contrast with this aesthetic activity, he also derived some enjoyment from his own private army - the small group of Sappers now established on the South Kensington site. Captain Fowke, John Donnelly, Richard Thompson and R. G. Wylde formed a committee to organise games for the Sappers,37 and on 17 July, a cricket match was arranged between them and the office staff. On 15 July Cole played at quoits with them; on 22 July at trap bal; on 5 December at football. The department paid for a Christmas dinner for the Sappers,38 and Cole attended this on Christmas Day, as he was to do in ensuing years. Bestriding the broad territory between art and war, Cole continued to be a regular attendant at Society of Arts meetings throughout the year.

Perhaps the main issue on which he focussed in the latter part of 1 8 57 was his contribution to a series of lectures on the Department of Science and Art and its activities. Cole spent a lot of time in late October and early November drafting his lecture, which was delivered as the first of the series on 16 November 1857.39 The department, as he pointed out, had lately come under the new management of the Committee of Council on Education, and had moved to South Kensington, so that a reappraisal was appropriate; he obviously also felt that it was time to confront various criticisms that had been made of the department. First he squared up to those who 'have thought that the Science and Art Department is a new creation of the

Government, and have commented on the important item which its expenses make in the parliamentary estimates of the year'. He maintained, against this, that the department was 'rather a consolidation of institutions which have been long established, than the creation of any new ones', and provided a potted history of it (paragraphs I-8).

He staunchly defended the department's functions in providing education for poor people, citing in support Adam Smith and Archbishop Cranmer. He was very conscious that he must placate those who deprecated 'state interference' in education, or indeed, in any sphere. He himself believed that the state should not "weaken or supersede individual exertions, but, on the contrary, aid and stimulate them by doing only those things which must either be done by some central authority or would otherwise be left undone'. He refered to John Stuart Mill as proving 'that education is one of those things which it is admissible in principle that a Government should provide for the people'. As an example of a service provided by his department that could not be offered except 'by a Government agency', he cited the collection and distribution of reproductions (plaster casts or electrotypes) of works of art: this was to be an abiding passion of his. On the other hand, he repented of his earlier attempt to provide technical classes at the School of Design. This had not worked because manufacturers would not employ the craftsmen thus trained, and it was now time for the state to withdraw from the unsuccessful experiment. (The existing technical classes did migrate from Marlborough House to South Kensington, but within a year or two faded away.) Cole had some fun with statistics of costs and benefits in education, and concluded his defence of state interference (paragraphs 11-17) by arguing

that whilst democratic power in this country has increased, so a demand upon the Government to exercise certain new functions has increased also. As the people have felt their wants, and have had power to express them in Parliament, so the central authority has been called upon to administer to these wants . . .. This has been the case especially with . .. public education . .. Indeed, it is proved that as people become iteent ndreere they likely tman ublducaton n ill pay for it.

Ate descibing he epaent hools an cour instrction (paraphs 18-26), he turned to the museum.

He leha  a e M heterogeneous' was justified, and perhaps he conceded too much when, relishing a sharp phrase, he admitted that 'the Iron Museum is only to be regarded as a tempo-oH  eh fact that it had earned public approval. 'It was prudent at least to try the experiment, which has been fully justified by success.' He went at length into attendance figures, to the working class', he pronounced a rhapsody over his working-class visitors:

In theveni the workingmancme to this Musu om s ne r odimly lhtohe whol party when they frst observe the brilliant lghting inside the Musum show what a new, acceptable, and wholesome excitement this evening entertainment affords t al o them. Perhaps theevenigpening of ublic Muss may urnish a poweful antidote to the gin palace.

He sresed that people came because they were made welcomeand were offer easy access. In the galleries, 'arranged so clearly that they may woo the ignorant to examine them', all exhibits were labelled, so there was no need to buy catalogues. Indeed, the whole museum was like a book 'with its pages always open, and not shut' Furthermore, this accessible museum would not be content to limit its audience to London. 'Its destiny is rather to become the central storehouseor treasury of Science and Art for the use of the whole kingdom. As soon as arrangements are made, it is proposed that any object that can properly be circulated to localities, should be sent upon a demand being made by the local authorities.' The books in the library would be circulated as well as the exhibits in the museum (paragraphs 2742).

In his peroration (paragraph 43), Cole returned to the leitmotiv of his life, efficient and transparent administration. He revealed, with incredulity, that 'it has been feebly assr that e concl inormation On the cntrary, e c

there is not a single detail in the action of this Department . . . which does not invite the fullest publicity. Every purchase in the Museum and Library is publicly exposed, and may be criticised. Even the prices of the articles are published. The schools . .  are open to all, and . .  the works produced are publicly exhibited in town and country.

In short, the department 'maintains two principles of administration which are essential to all sound management': direct, individual responsibility and full publicity. 'Without these all corporate action must become corrupt and torpid, let the body consist of legislators, or local tradesmen, or mercantile adventurers.' Or, he might have added, the crew of civil servants, artists, scientists and soldiers, which now occupied South Kensington.

During the remainder of 1857 the lecture series continued: Redgrave on the Sheepshanks collection 'with a view to the formation of a national gallery of British art', Playfair on the 'scientific institutions in connexion with the Department', Burchett on the Central Training School for Art, Robinson on the art museum, and James Fergusson on 'A National Collection of Architectural Art'. These were all published, and constitute a sort of manifesto for the department. The series continued in 1858 with six lectures on the animal products collection (including one by T. H. Huxley), and a further six on other matters, including R. H. Soden Smith on the Art Library and John Bell on the modern sculpture that was exhibited in the museum for a few years. At these lectures, 'the Lecture Theatre has been always crowded, frequently inconveniently so', reported Cole. Some 3 5o seats were regularly reserved for working men.41

$$
\beta _ { i } ^ { \ast } = \beta _ { i } ^ { \ast } \qquad \beta _ { i } ^ { \ast } = \beta _ { i } ^ { \ast }
$$

By $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 5 8$ , then, the department seemed to have been rebuilt on satisfactory new foundations. Its annual report, or 'blue-book' was issued in the summer of 18 58, and was reviewed in The Times. Much of this notice concerned the South Kensington

Museum ('organized by Mr. Cole'), and it is tempting to think that Cole may have planted these paragraphs, or at least steered the journalist who wrote them. On the one hand, they criticise the iron building, which we know Cole disliked. Dismissing it as a woful [sic] failure', the notice admonishes: 'that "something must be done" is obvious'. On the other hand, the notice lavishes praise in terms such as Cole surely wished to hear.

The Museum at Kensington is a wonderful favourite of the public, considering its remote and far from central situation. 4o,ooo persons attend monthly, whereas at Marlborough-house, in the last year before the removal, the average monthly attendance was only 7,8oo . . . . It is the 'attraction' and not the 'site' that regulates the number of visitors, and the number who have visited the models of patented inventions at South Kensington has by 3o to 1 exceeded the number of visitors to the annual exhibition of the Society of Arts in the Adelphi - a central situation. The evening visitors exceed the diurnal in the ratio of s to I, and the working classes abound, appearing highly delighted with the Museum itself and the exhibition . . .. On the whole, the public manifest a worthy and laudable desire to use the facilities offered by the State for the study of science and art . . . and the removal of the department from Marlboroughhouse to South Kensington has proved signally successful.42

Cole did not rest on his laurels. The year 18 5 8 brought plenty of art school business to deal with, and a change of management. Palmerston's government fell in February, so the department said farewell to their ministers, Granville and Cowper, and welcomed in their place (in Lord Derby's minority Conservative ministry) Lord Salisbury as lord president and C. B. Adderley, MP, as vice-president. During the brief period of political manoeuvring that led to Palmerston's return to office in 1859, artistic and educational business seems to have proceeded as usual.

On 28 January, J. Shaw-Lefevre, now clerk of the Parliaments, met Cole and asked him 'why I did not give up the Arts as that had been done, & take to something new'. Cole does not note his own reply, but he must have had a sense that things in the South Kensington art world, far from being 'done', were moving forward smartly, especially the development of the site under Prince Albert's direction. On 9 February, Cole learned from Edgar Bowring that the prince liked his plans for 'dividing the ground' in the quadrangle. On 28 March, he discussed with the Horticultural Society the possibility of the society's managing the 'inner garden at Kengoanter he riasiethe or rhun  My, the laying out of the terrace on the quadrangle commenced the next day. On 16 July the prince gave his approval to the idea of involving the Horticultural Society, and appointed Cole, Redgrave and Fowke, with the architect Sidney Smirke, to take the project forward.43

In the meantime, the 185 1 commission, which in 185 2 had entered into a partnership with the government to develop the South Kensington site, decided that the partnership was hindering rather than helping them, and should be ended. Cole recorded a meeting on 13 April 1858 between Prince Albert, Edgar Bowring and himself at which this was decided, noting also that this was first occasion on which the prince asked us toit down! The partnerhp was fnally dissolved in anuary 1859, ut the decision in 18 58 no doubt gave extra impetus to Cole's site-planning efforts.

An increased sense that things were going his way might have stolen into Cole's consciousness when he heard on 2o May that Playfair was a candidate for the professorship of chemistry at Edinburgh. Playfair succeeded in obtaining this chair, as Cole heard on June 29. Fowke volunteered to replace Playfair as referee for science, but Cole and Redgrave conferred on 3o June, and decided that this post was not necessary. The administration of the scientific side of the department's business fell now to a young officer of the Royal Engineers, 24-year-old Lieutenant John Donnelly. It was later recalled that 'there was so little of a science branch of the department then that it was doubtful whether the post should be flled up after . . . Playfair went to Edinburgh'. Donnelly, however, 'was asked to carry on the work pro tem', and performed so successfully as to make it his life's mission.45

Another field in which Cole put down markers for the future was international exhibitions. At the council of the Society of Arts on 3 May 18 5 8 he took the chair and led a discussion on the possibility of holding another Great Exhibition in 1861, 10 years on from the first. This discussion led to a formal proposal to the council, which was discussed inconclusively on 1o March, Cole noting impatiently in his diary: 'No plan: Again adjourned'. He was seized with the idea of including music in this exhibition, a notion that had come to him after attending a performance of Samson (Handel's oratorio, presumably) with Marian, Hennie and Mary on 5 May. Dilke, however, who was chairman of the council of the Society of Arts in 1857 and '58, 'did not sympathize with the project for music'.46 Nor was Prince Albert's support unequivocal, when Cole discussed the idea of an 1861 exhibition with him on 20 March: 'Prince opposed, but agreed to receive proposals' from the Society of Arts. Nonetheless, Cole pushed on with further discussions on 22 and 24 March, and persuaded the Society of Arts council to commit itself to supporting a programme of 'decennial exhibitions' in principle, and an 1861 exhibition in particular, which 'should be an Exhibition of works selected for excellence, illustrating especially the progress of Industry and Art, and arranged according to classes, and not countries; and . . . should comprehend Music and also Painting, which was excluded in 185 1'. Dilke announced the decision to the society's general meeting on 14 April.47 Cole recorded that a council meeting on 5 May 'settled arrangements' for the exhibition, and he walked home with Dilke, both of them satisfied, no doubt, at having launched another project.

Cole ought, then, to have felt that the trajectory of his life was following a rising curve. But several family problems cropped up at this time. Of Cole's four brothers, Lindsay had died in 18 5 2, aged 42. His affairs had taken long to sort out, and seem to have ended in an arbitration of bankruptcy, which Cole had to settle on 13 July. Lindsay's son Wentworth, who, born in 1836, was the senior male in the younger generation of Coles, seems to have been in some difficulties, too, since Cole had already on 9 February been to the bank to 'sell out Wentworth's dividends' in order to cover a debt of £3oo which he had incurred in some speculation with his uncle Richard. Visiting his father in Kew (as he often did on Sundays) on 13 June, Cole discovered that his youngest brother, Charles, was 'in trouble about his debts', and (he learned two days later) was resigned to going through the insolvency courts. However, on 24 August, Charles was more optimistic that he could hold off his creditors. Worst of all was the case of Cole's brother William, who was chronically wayward. Cole, Charles and Wentworth had already, on $3 0$ January $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 \varsigma >$ , come to the conclusion that he should be 'kept in confinement', and on 5 June $\operatorname { I } 8 5 8$ Cole 'went to Winchester to arrange for William's removal to [a] Lunatic Asylum'. Paying for William's confinement (mostly in an establishment run by a Dr Finch at Salisbury) was thenceforward a steady drain on Cole's resources, until in 1865 William was sufficiently recovered to be let out again.

These problems must have been depressing for Cole, and it seems that he was not well himself. He reached the age of 5o on 15 July, after 1o years of unremittingly driven work, and was feeling the strain. On 27 April, his friend and doctor, Seymour Haden, had 'advised very good living & Iron' as a pick-me-up for Cole - which sounds like a (not unpalatable) prescription for stress  but when Cole consulted him again on 19 July, he suggested that Cole should take a month's holiday in Italy, and sent him to see Sir James Clark, the royal physician. Clark, three days later, told Cole that he must take a whole year's rest, and endorsed the suggestion of Italy. Cole sorted out his affairs, and just over a month later, on 28 August, set off for Italy.

He kept a diary of his trip, to which, when he had it bound up later, he gave a printed title page. This supplies a characteristically efficient summary of what transpired

A journal kept by Henry Cole, C.B., during his absence from England on sick leave, and relating to his travels in Northern Italy with Samuel and Richard Redgrave during September 1858;— his stay in Switzerland with Marian F. Cole, his wife, from the rt of October to the $6 ^ { t h }$ of December 1858; and his stay in Rome during January 1859; Naples, in February; and Florence, in February; and passage through France with his daughters Letitia Marian, and Mary Charlotte Cole, March MDCCCLIX.48

The first few pages, describing how he and the Redgraves crossed the Channel, seems to be a letter to Marian and the children, ending affectionately but with Victorian formality, Kisses to all. Henry Cole'. Thereafter Cole kept a proper journal, day by day, which he sent back to his children at home in instalments.

The three men travelled through France and over the Alps, wherever possible by rail. Railways were opening all over Europe at that moment; a hotelkeeper would tell Cole that 'his season . .  owing to railways was now [extended] a month later than it used to be' $\left( \mathrm { p . 7 5 } \right)$ . Among Cole's lively observations, encounters with food are often mentioned: 'hashed hare & fricandeau in tomatoes both dishes such as could hardly be got out of France' (f.5v), 'a new kind of soup with large pieces of bread in it & ground cheese to be sprinkled on them' (p.9). He always had a sharp eye for people. u  l   arT Lots of young stupid clownish fellows in training for the tonsure led about like recruits' (p.1o). 'Four strong minded Ladies who seemed travelling by themselves' (p. 17). 'Two Girls beating flax in the Stream - so tall  so lissome - no stooping & so e ay.. In Fehe  ead like any other ladies of London or Paris  All capitals at least produce the same kind ofupper classes' (p.39). At Milan he noted: 'Paris seemed an over-soldiered city  but Milan is much more so' (p.6o). His eye for scenery was equally keen, whether enjoying sunsets behind Alpie peaks or oting that the Arno was like pea sup o tc & muddy & frothy' (p.28).

Once in Italy, the three friends embarked on serious artistic tourism. Every evening Cole would plan the next day's programme (pp.534). Cole always responded well to buildings, giving detailed descriptions of, for example, the cathedrals at Pisa and Florence, and not necessarily taking the conventional view of the monuments he saw. Of St Mark's, Venice, he wrote: 'Ruskin has rhapsodized about its perfections  It seems much more what it really is, a vast collection of thefts from al parts compacted together as best they might be' (p.47). He noticed humble townscape as readily as ancient monuments. Painted villas in the suburbs of Genoa caused him to reflect that 'all the sorts of things which we abominate in England as shams  sham mouldings sham pilasters  sham windows are painted here as common as may be' (p.22). He seems to have preferred architecture to painting, and his references to picture galleries tend to be perfunctory. Professionally, as a museum curator, his field was not confined to art. Hence, while Redgrave 'was dwelling on the paintings' in the Pitti Palace at Florence, Cole 'went to the Museum of Nat: History. It is remarkable for a very fine collection of wax dissections', i.e. anatomical models (p.34).

The three friends scrutinised Pisa, Florence, Bologna, Mantua, Verona, Venice, Padua, and Milan at a great pace. Sometimes, they had to skimp and leave unexamined what was described in detail in the guidebooks. In Bologna, for example, they 'passed hastily through' the church of San Stefano, and Cole guiltily noted 'it is a subject for much study (see Murray)' (p.42). In Pisa, Cole's sightseeing was sabotaged for a while because he lost his spectacles. But he got another set from 'an optician who had been at the exhibition of London! So oddly things turn up' (p.29).

On 26 September they left Italy by the St Gotthard pass for Switzerland. On 28 September in Chaumont, the Redgraves set off back to London, and Marian Cole arrived to join Henry. The pace of life slackened now. Henry and Marian toured around, hardly noticing any art, taking walks and enjoying picnics: 'We made our luncheon in the train off a bottle of wine, some bread, pears & sausage flavoured with garlic  I relished it much' (p.67). At Vevey, they were disappointed in Philip Owen's 'pet Inn' (p.75), which was very crowded, and were happier in Lausanne. Here Cole joined an English library and read the English papers. 'I see the numbers keep up to 10,ooo at S. Kensington Museum' (p.8o). His memory thus jogged, he now kept on thinking about South Kensington. On 14 October he 'dreamt very distinctly about the designs for the quadrangle at S. Kensington'  that is, the main rectangle of the commissioners' site — and was convinced 'that any Gothic style was too cramped & that only a very free Italian style could be adopted' (p.8 1). After dreaming about the quadrangle again the next night, he sat down to 'draft a letter to the Prince about Kensington'. On I7 October, he only remembered that it was Marian's birthday (her 47th) because letters from home reminded him. 'She is a great blessing to us all', he dutifully noted (p.83).

On 2o October, feeling 'much better', he found himself 'designing a music hall for Kensington' (p.87). This project took hold of him: on 22 October his 'Music Hall with picture galleries' assumed 'grandiose dimensions' (p.88), and the next day he acknowledged that he must start again because his project 'would cost 7oo ooof and only about 7o.ooo± can be afforded' (p.89). Nonetheless, he worked on at the project and on 1 5 November he and Marian were 'writing out prospectuses of a Chorus Hall company' (p.1 18), which Cole arranged to have printed on the 22nd. Apart from this, time passed quietly at Lausanne, as the leaves fell from the trees, winter frosts began, and Cole sketched the snowy mountains. After a little more touring at the beginning of December, Henry and Marian reached Geneva where, on the 6th, they were joined by Tishy and Mary. They travelled on to Lyons and Arles, whence Marian left for home on the 1oth.

Cole and his daughters travelled to Marseilles, and then by boat, past Corsica, to Civita Vecchia, and on by coach to Rome. Having taken lodgings in Rome, they revelled in its luminous beauty. 'We have resolved to make drawings of Rome from our windows. The towers & roofs & gables show themselves in most picturesque lines - And the Colours & shadows are so clear & positive. From the window of our little dining room we overlook a garden of evergreens with a complete grove of orange trees studded with golden fruit' (pp.172-3). As Christmas approached, they noticed the customs of the season  the pifferari (shepherd bagpipers down from the hills), and the presepio and children's ceremonies at the church of Ara Coeli.

They undertook some serious artistic sightseeing. For Cole this had a special slant. He was on the lookout for features of Renaissance architecture that would be 'suggestive' for the gardens at South Kensington, and he commissioned photographs to take back to his designers in England.49 So eager was Cole in this quest that his companions 'were all on the alert to hear me say "highly suggestive", and often used the term themselves to tease him (p.29o). On 25 January he noticed a house being ornamented with sgraffiatura decoration, and 'mounted upstairs' to see at close quarters how this technique was executed: he was later to use it at South Kensington (p.289).

Cole was also on the lookout for what could be acquired for his museum's collections. While this was often a matter of noting objects that could be reproduced in the form of photographs or plaster casts, he also began to treat with dealers (p.244). In investigating the Campana collection, it occurred to him that, while in purchasing maiolica South Kensington would always be in rivalry with the British Museum, in the field of Italian sculpture there was no other museum in Britain with an interest, apart from South Kensington. He resolved to get J. C. Robinson to pursue this. (p.249) During their five-and-a-half week stay, Cole and his daughters tramped through countless churches, often attending service. It is clear that Cole had no more sympathy for Catholicism in religion than he had for the Gothic Revival in architecture. As a good English Protestant, he was often disparaging about Romanist ritual: so like I believe the ceremonies of the Egyptians & Pagans & very unlike the religion of the poor carpenter's son of Nazareth' (p.268). Eventually it was time to move on: The objects of interest & investigation are endless and one feels as if one had had only a glimpse at them' (p.291). Cole reflected that 'Rome is a sort of Museum belonging to the world'. Perhaps it was a sign of his recuperated energies that he could not forbear from jotting down some notes on how he would administer this museum so as to bring it up to scratch, before pulling himself up: 'but I suppose all this has been thought of and suggested again and again' (p.291).

The ep ow poe, by boat, toNapleWell enjy the enss o  u  a h  eo Borboni. On visiiPopei, his erreeurial zel aga arte isel,  he fntasize abut setting up a huge iteatnally-nd rchaological pre:

te whol iht  avate  yrs n Publi Muss  ll ct - p Hey hcsl (.1 made some purchases from dealers (p.323).

He and the girls then returned by sea to Civita Vecchia and on to Leghorn; and by train through Pisa and Lucca to Florence, relishing 'the ride by the side of the Appenines with their little Towns in the valleys & Monasteries and Castles on the heights & the snow in the distance' (p.34 1 ). Unwonted comfort awaited them in their Florence pensione: 'There is an air of entire Cleanliness & good management throughout  It made us all feel as though we had again reached Civilization' (p.342). By now Cole was so recovered that his mind was almost entirely on museum business. When he and his daughters visited San Miniato on 12 February, his museum director's acquisitiveness reasserted itself. This church, he noted, 'is now being cared for but a few years ago would have yielded a mine of wealth for a Museum' (p.345). Attending church on the next day, they met, with his wife, the collector Charles Drury Fortnum, whom Cole had encountered previously in connection with the Soulages collection. Two days later Fortnum introduced Cole to William Blundell Spence, an English painter resident in Florence, who chiefly operated as a dealer. 'A very desirable agent to have here & may be extremely useful', noted Cole, presciently (p.3 5 5). Every day for the next 1o days, Cole met either Fortnum or Spence, toured the antique dealers, and made numerous purchases for the museum.50 He was now thoroughly re-attuned to his museum work. He left Florence on 24 February, and travelled back through France to Britain, and to South Kensington.
