> 来源：The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ\The great exhibitor _ the life and work of Henry Cole -- Elizabeth Bonython, Anthony Burton -- London, United Kingdom, 2003 -- V  A Publ.md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

# PART FIVE: 'OLD KING COLE'

CHAPTER I4

1874-1882

Cole was called 'Old King Cole' on many occasions: one that pleased him and which he noted in his diary, was when the Princess of Wales greeted him at the Royal Albert Hall with 'I hope Old King Cole is quite well.' He was generally applauded as a 'merry old soul', though his portraits and photographs show him looking serious, even threatening. An exception is a thumbnail sketch by Dicky Doyle (plate 47), which was probably drawn during an evening party in 1874.2 His jolliness caused him to be taken at least three times for Lord Houghton (Richard Monckton-Milnes), who was well known for his bonhomie.3

Cole was now an establishment figure, attending the annual Royal Academy dinner, the Lord Mayor's banquet, and similar functions. He was invited to join the board of the Mutual Insurance Company, and that of the new National Penny Bank, founded by his son-in-law George Bartley in 1874. His fame reached the realms of fiction, and in a three-volume romantic novel of the 187os, A Princess of Thule, he is mentioned in the same breath as Plato. The hero asks his bride, 'Would you like me to repeat to you one of the Dialogues of Plato - about the immortality of Mr. Cole, and the moral effect of the South Kensington Museum?'. Cole was amused by this enough to put it in his diary.4 He was even renowned among children. Aunt Judy's Magazine for Young People published extracts from an essay by a remarkably well-informed 'little Nigger' in Barbados, 1o-year-old George Augustus W. Bispum, who wrote that Prince Albert 'errected a Mossoleeum at Kenzington London for the grate Mr. Coal, ware you may Learn art and sighence and Buy ginger Beer and bath Buns which is a grate Blessing to the subjex of Her grashious Madjisty'.5

In 1871, the Society of Arts gave him its highest award, the Albert Medal. The president of the society, the Prince of Wales, had been ill with typhoid so Cole received his medal at Marlborough House. 'To see the Pr of Wales for the first time since his illness. He gave me the Albert Medal with a little speech.'6 Cole joined a noble company that included Rowland Hill, the first recipient in 1864; Napoleon III in $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 6 5 ; ^ { 7 }$ Michael Faraday, 1866; W. F. Cooke and Charles Wheatstone, for the electric telegraph, 1867; Joseph Whitworth, 1868; Justus von Liebig, 1869; and Ferdinand de Lesseps, for the Suez Canal, 1870.8 Grand old man though Cole was, the public recognition of a knighthood was delayed until 1875. Time was needed to forget the Simkins affair, and the failure of the international exhibitions of the 1870s. It was under Disraeli's second (Conservative) administration that the honour was given. Cole recorded that he went down to Windsor on his own and changed into his court dress at the White Hart Hotel. At the ceremony in the castle, the Queen looked "Sir Henr cole

When Cole retired from the museum, moves were made to present him with a testimonial. A fund was launched at a meeting at Willis's Rooms on II July. Among other tributes, it was said that Cole, through the works of art acquired by the museum, had enriched the country to the extent of half a million pounds.10 He was asked 'what I shd wish if the Testimonial reached £ 2o,ooo. I said it would not reach half & that £ zooo wd be a success. I shd prefer a house. Did not approve of a scholarship'. A year later it was clear that '£2ooo was to be given to me', and, as to a memorial, I expressed a preference for a Mosaic portrait done after Moody, & a bust instead of any plate'. Cole also forbade 'any public dinner or ceremonial for the presentation of the Testimonial'.1l Moody pushed ahead with an aedicule in his 'Della Robbia' ceramic, which was to enclose a mosaic portrait executed by Florence Cole (daughter of Cole's cousin Arthur, of Liverpool), who was attending the mosaic class, one of the classes for ladies at the art school. By February 1875 Cole's friends were ready to investigate placing it in the museum, but, to Cole's fury, the department decided 'not to allow the admission of the portrait of any living person'. The snub caused Cole to rage against his former colleagues: 'Owen who owes his whole position to me: MacLeod whom I shielded for his neglect & incapacity in the accounts. Sandford who wd not have opened the Exhibition of 1862 without my aid.' Then, affecting a stiff upper lip, he claimed to be 'so hardened to the blows & ingratitude that I can truly say I am now indifferent'. 12 In due course, the authorities relented and admitted the memorial. It was placed, as already decided, on a landing of the Ceramic Staircase, where it might harmonise with other ceramic decorations designed by Moody. But the Ceramic Staircase is in an obscure back corner of the museum, and Cole came to think, resentfully, that the location of the memorial was 'inappropriate from all points', and that 'Want of Manners & Brains placed it there'.13 A bust of Cole was also made, by Joseph Edgar Boehm. Cole sat for it in 1875, and a marble version, exhibited the following year at the Academy, was placed in the Royal Albert Hall. Among other copies, the V&A has a terracotta version.14

Cole's friends expected great things of him in his retirement. John Bright said, 'I suppose you will retire into political life', 15implying that he might make a new career as a Member of Parliament. But he had such a bad reputation as an aberrant civil servant  he was told that he was 'so hateful to Government that it wd never ask me to do anything again if it could be helped'6  that he could not have hoped to be more than a backbench maverick. So he chose to pursue the public good in the ways he had learned at the start of his career, lobbying through institutions such as the Society of Arts and through prominent men of influence such as Lord Granville. He expected that, although he had left the museum, he would be able to continue to operate as 'Plenipotentiary of South Kensington' and promoter of Prince Albert's vision, through his influence with the 1851 commissioners.17 On 13 August $\tau 8 7 2$ , the commissioners elected him as a member of their body. To improve their own efficiency they also decided to create a management committee with a paid executive officer. This post was offered to Cole, but he felt he could not accept it until he had retired from the museum. He then spent the year 1874 as a paid servant of the commissione but, in rder toaccpt the pay, ha t ste down as a cissner. By now it was obvious that his scheme for perpetual exhibitions would fail, and he became increasingly disillusioned with the commissioners. He made himself a thorn in their side as they tried to develop their estate with private houses, since he felt that they were betraying Prince Albert's aims for art and science. He even appealed to the Queen over their heads in 1876.19 Despite his prickly relationship with the commission, he did succeed in planting two more institutions on the South Kensington site: the National Training School for Cookery, and the National Training School for Music.

An interest in cookery had been growing in his mind. In April 1872 he was discussing it with Harry,2 and in autumn that year 'Cookery and its science' was adopted as a section of the international exhibition planned for 1873.21 The Society of Arts was invited to help, and a special cooking committee was formed with the Hon. (war) Frederick Leveson-Gower as chairman. He had joined the sociey i18, but had never been as active as his elder brother, Lord Granville, who was a vicepresident. Like his brother, he was a Liberal in politics, and he served as Member of Parliament for Bodmin from 1859 to 1885. He lived in South Audley Street and employed a French chef, Emile Béguinot, who made his dinners famous. Béguinot was obviously a Victorian 'celebrity chef', and was himself elected to the food committee in January 1873.22

The 1873 exhibition included two classes relating to food, Class 13 ('Cooking and its science') as well as Class I2 ('Food'). The former was to include 'apparatus and utensils . . . all descriptions of domestic machinery . . . ice machines . . . hydrometers, saccharometers, &c'.23 To these were added a demonstration kitchen that expanded to include a cookery school. At a meeting in February, the committee resolved 'to have a hundred recipes prepared for cooking, in the best way, one hundred dishes particularly suited to all classes with incomes not exceeding £ 5oo a year, such dishes to be the subject of demonstration in the school'.24

When the exhibition opened on I4 April, the 'School of Popular Cookery' proved a huge success. On 9 May the Queen herself came with Princess Louise and watched as three cooks demonstrated how to make an omelette aux fines herbes (plate 43). They tasted it and pronounced it 'very good'.25 The demonstration was accompanied by a commentary by Mr J. C. Buckmaster. He, having started life as a labourer, came to hold a post in the Department of Science and Art as an organising master of science and art classes in the provinces. Cole had heard that he 'was like an untamed Newfoundland dog',26 but he had a gift for communicating with people. Playfair reported from Edinburgh in 1868 that 'he has a wonderful power of addressing artizans & with his stories & natural eloquence kept them thoroughly interested for an hour'.27 When he took up lecturing on food and cookery, his lectures were an immediate hit. In 1873 he gave 362 lectures, publishing 14 of them in the next year as Buckmaster's cookery.

Cole wanted to found a permanent cookery school, and as usual his was a visionary and radical approach. He aimed to train teachers and introduce cookery lessons into elementary schools, so that the nation's diet and, consequently, health would be improved. To accommodate his school, he borrowed from the royal commissioners the sheds in Exhibition Road that had been used for cookery demonstrations - behind the exhibition arcades and between the French and Belgian annexes28 - and looked around for suitable staff. As superintendent, or headmistress, he found a friend of Frederick Leveson-Gower, Lady Barker. She was the widow of Col. Sir George Barker, who was knighted after the Crimean War and died in India in 1861. She then married Frederick Broome, 17 years her junior, in 1865. Together they went to New Zealand to run a sheep station, and prospered until a snowstorm buried their house and smothered their animals, and they were ruined.29 They returned to London, where both wrote for the papers, and she published several books about her New Zealand experiences. Nowadays, those interested in the Aesthetic Movement in interior design in the 187os and 188os still consult her book The bedroom and the boudoir (1878), one of a series advising the middle classes on the furnishing and decoration of their rooms.

Frederick and Mary Anne Broome  or Lady Barker, as she continued to call herself - led an active social life in London: Cole noted that the duchess of Somerset called on her one day, while he was also visiting her.30 He opened discussions with her late in 1873, and she was appointed superintendent in the New Year 1874.31 She herself wrote that she was appointed 'to my deep amazement, for I have never cared in the least what I ate, provided it was "neat and clean".32 Despite this lack of interest in the subject, her First lessons in the principles of cooking was published in 1874. It was written before the school opened, and speaks optimistically of the future. Lady Barker's plans are very different from Cole's concept of teaching mothers of poor families to manage their meagre means, though she does urge thrift on both rich and poor.33 She refers to 'this great need of the English  the want of some place where a girl or woman can be taught to cook', and suggests that servants might be sent for tuition while the family is away.34 Her main thrust, which she lays out in her final chapter as 'the gist of the whole Matter', is to instruct ladies of her own caste.

She later described how, when the school opened its doors, there was

W ha a t  He , for these pupils were by no means the class he wanted to get at. Fine ladies of every rank, rich women, gay Americans in beautiful clothes, all thronged our kitchens, and the waiting carriages looked as if a smart party were going on within our dingy shes  It was really tocing e beutiul owns pined back nd cove large coarse aprons, and jewelled hands wielding scrubbing brushes.35

F p  .

Sir Henry Cole had foreseen that we ought to begin at the very beginning, so the first thing taught was how to clean a stove with all its flues, puzzling little doors, &c. Then it was ordained that the practical pupil was to be shown how to clean, quickly and thoroughly, saucepans, frying-pans, and in short all kitchen utensils. This was followed by a course of scrubbing tables and hearths.36

Noigyhenh,  La Barkei ac  y

I M Frederick Broome called on Cole to tell him that 'she was overworked and was hi ulake fro  jnalim. In the warm teglow meory, se wrote that he  no regret the work, or it was of incalculable beneft to me to learn Sir Henry Cole' method of dealing with subjects, and to watch his habits of patient attention and care of even the minutest details'.39

At the time, though, she and Cole did not get on. A feisty woman who had dug sheep out of snowdrifts with her bare hands, and who, at the same time, thought herself grand, was not likely to take kindly to being ordered about by a man whom she regarded as her social inferior, even if he had been the director of a great museum. She had an over-gracious manner, and Cole noticed her 'smile and peremptoriness with learners', which he found amusing.40 She was reluctant to set up a class for artisans, and it was only started, in November 1874, after Cole had been tough with her. She was unmethodical, and Cole thought her keeping of accounts 'Strange'. One day she confused £55 with £5. He discovered that she hid bills in her purse or in a drawer, and did not keep copies of correspondence.41 In November they had a row about the part played by Buckmaster: 'Lady Barker very jealous of Buckmaster. Said he only puffed his books in his lectures. I fired up and said that but for his work she would not now be sitting where she was.' A few weeks later he reproved her for absence and she 'was much put out'.42 In February 1875 Cole heard that her husband was posted to Natal as colonial secretary, and that she was to follow him there after six months. He greeted this as 'Good news for the Cookery School'. She delayed in giving notice, which worried him and caused a boil to come up on his neck. Leveson Gore tried to intercede but Cole threatened that he himself would resign: 'I wd not serve again until she was gone'.43 The Broomes sailed away to Natal, proceeding in 1882 to Western Australia, where he was the last colonial governor, and she, as an expert on decoration, 'made a good fist of denting the 1860s interior' of Government House in Perth by importing Japanese fans and other Aesthetic ornaments.44

Back at the school on 3 July 1875, Cole secured the appointment, as superintendent, of Edith Nicholls, granddaughter of Thomas Love Peacock, who had been Lady Barker's assistant. Cole had known her since she was a child, and she was far more biddable than Lady Barker. Cole could now concentrate, as he announced in a letter to The Times, on training teachers from the country to teach cookery to girls in provincial towns. The London School Board and the Society of Arts backed this plan. 'Our real business', repeated Cole a couple of years later, 'is to create teachers for Public Schools.'45 By 1878, after only four years, 5,ooo pupils had passed the school's exams, over Ioo of them with teacher's diplomas. Schools were opened in provincial towns and 'Food, and its preparation' was introduced by the committee of council on education, for girls only, in elementary schools in 1876.46 With a grant of £5oo from the royal commissioners,47 the school became self-supporting, and in 1889 moved into a new building in Buckingham Palace Road, where it continued until absorbed into the Westminster Technical College in the 1960s.

Cole went on to promote cookery as part of the wider subject of Domestic Economy, which embraced the 'laws of health, food, and cookery, clothing and its materials, the dwelling, and household thrift'. 'Young ladies will never be married if they don't study it,' he boomed, 'and those who are married will never make their husbands comfortable and happy if they don't encourage it.'48 Using the Society of Arts, he promoted annual conferences on domestic economy in Birmingham in 1877,

Manchester in $\textrm { I } 8 7 8$ , and London in 1879 and 1881. The society desisted from these after his death.49

The other institution that Cole was able to bring to South Kensington was a training college for music teachers. He had loved music for the whole of his life. When he was I 3 his father gave him 'a black ebony flute with silver keys', and the memory of that 'blissful day stil move him 5 years later.0As a3-year-old, living for thefrt time in his chambers in Buckingham Street, he hired a piano and held musical parties, where he sang Purcell songs to his friends.51 He also sang glees with his cousins, the McNabs.52 Without a deep knowledge, he wrote reviews of operas and drawingroom music. As he grew older he no longer performed but always enjoyed listening to music, particularly large choral works. He tried to introduce good music to the general public. His idea for a large hall to be built as part of the 1862 exhibition came to nothing, but the Royal Albert Hall, with its popular concerts, was pushed through by him with his usual vigour.

Until the late nineteenth century, the only place to train in Britain as a professional musician was the Royal Academy of Music, founded in 1823. This institution, however, 'suffered a meagre and precarious existence', afflicted by poverty, not to mention 'grandiloquent and muddled aspirations, incompetence and petty rivalries', and cut a sorry figure in comparison with music academies abroad. A special problem lay in the enforced 'submission, by staff and students, to the arbitrary authority of men whose background rendered them quite incapable of understanding the economic realities of the musician's life', i.e. aristocratic amateurs.53 Over the years there had been a long, but ultimately unsuccessful, courtship between the academy and South Kensington. The academy itself made the first advances, when in 1854 it asked the 185 1 commissioners (in vain) for a niche on the South Kensington site. By 1865 a move to South Kensington was again on the cards. 54 But this was, for Cole and the commissioners, conditional on the ailing principal of the academy, Charles Lucas, making way for Cole's favourite conductor, Michael Costa, known to be an efficient martinet capable of carrying through necessary reforms. The academy, however, chose the composer William Sterndale Bennett as its new principal, in June 1866. Cole described Bennett as 'timid but agreeable'. It was probably timidity that ultimately caused the academy to recoil from Cole's embrace. Bennett's biography, written by his son,6 hints mournfully at bad faith on the part of South Kensington. Fifty Years, in a chapter written by Cole's son,57 implies that the academy was feeble and vacillating. By 1 August 1869 it seemed as if 'all treaty with RA of Music was ended', and Cole set about organising a separate music school.

Yet once more, he worked through the Society of Arts. It had held its own musical examinations for many years, and in $\mathrm { ~ I ~ } 8 6 4$ Cole pushed it into setting up a musical education committe.8 Questionnaires were sent out to schools and conservatories allover Europe and the information collected was incorporated into a petition to the House of Commons in 1868, which asked for universal musical education to be brought in under the government. When nothing came of this, and with the academy beigof no help, Cole got the socity toassert that 'musi should be cultivated as e o tejects  the SoctyThe he began raisg money t fun scholarshi r students from all over the country. He organised a series concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in. Theyail o tur a prot, but provid publcity, and Cole ght funding in other ways, approaching philanthropists whom he knew. When he asked Sir Titus Salt to dig into his pocket, Sir Titus asked how much he should give. Watr you thi will look bt t he ay  Junt plCole an Titus wrote a cheque for £1,o00.60

At first, classes were held in rooms in the Royal Albert Hall, but separate premises were obviously needed. Cole found a possible sponsor in Charles Freake, the great speculative builder, who was a neighbour in South Kensington and had built many houses in the neighbourhood, earning the credit for raising it to the status of 'a second Belgravia'.61 Cole and Marian used to go to his elaborate musical parties at his house at No. 21 Cromwell Road, almost opposite the museum. As prospects for the new school looked favourable, the academy was given a last chance to join in. But at aming n March 183, theyost the nerve.Freake, who was at te mei said 'he c[oul]d never do business with such incompetent old & worn out fogies'. But he would do business with Cole, and offered, if the commissioners would give land, to put up a building at his own expense. He had his sights set on a baronetcy, which he gained in 1882.

Having achieved the promise of a building, Cole got his son Harry, back from India, to design it for free, advised and guided by his father.62 The Duke of Edinburgh laid the foundation stone on 18 December 1873, and, by February following, a model had been prepared.63 It was basically a simple block, since it contained little other than 18 practice rooms.64 But its fa§ade was given some advance and recession by large oriel windows, and its flat surfaces were disguised by the copious application of panels of sgraffito decoration, designed by F. W. Moody. Arthur Sullivan, who was a musical friend and protégé of the duke, was appointed the first principal, and the school was opened on 17 May 1 876. Cole did much of the agitation for the school in the fraught years of 1872-3, when he was under threat from Lowe. No doubt it encouraged him to think that while one part of his empire was under attack, he still had the energy to extend it in other directions.

Cole lived just long enough to see his National Training School transformed into the Royal College of Music, and housed on a much grander scale in its present building, south of the Albert Hall, designed by Sir A. W. Blomfield and financed by the Leeds ironmaster, Samson Fox.65 Cole would have approved of its new principal, George Grove, whom he had known since Grove was secretary of the Society of Arts in 185o-52. Grove was a Victorian phenomenon hardly less energetic and manysided than Cole himself. 'An early school-leaver who had shown no outstanding promise of academic distinction, he went to the top of several professions buoyed up by a combination of faith in the work ethic and an insatiable curiosity.'66 Trained as an engineer, he became a Bible scholar and Holy Land archaeologist, an editor and man of letters, the impresario of the Sydenham Crystal Palace, and a musicologist whose abiding memorial is the Dictionary of Music and Musicians, universally known simply as 'Grove'. Cole twice tried to recruit him to South Kensington, offering him the curatorship of the Museum of Patents in 186o, and again approaching him in 1865 when the museum acquired a collection of musical instruments.67 Cole had a high opinion of him, and had considered him as a member of the staff of the National Training School.68 The new Royal College of Music flourished under his rule.

It has been argued that it was the beneficial influence of the college that created what is usually called 'the English Musical Renaissance'. In the nineteenth century, England was often regarded as the 'land without music', especially in comparison with Germany, but in the century's closing years signs of recovery were evident. George Bernard Shaw commented that in England 'the history of original music, broken off by the death of Purcell, begins again with Sir Edward Elgar', and the resulting renaissance (sustained by composers such as Stanford, Parry and Vaughan Williams) was felt by 1934 to be 'a finished and perfect structure'.69 This renaissance used to be explained7° in terms of the personal genius of the composers involved, or of the mysterious currents of the artistic climate. But a recent revisionist account71 has looked rather to cultural politics, social pressures and institutional influences, highlighting the Royal College of Music. This 'designated zone of national musical productivity' and 'academic control centre'72 is seen as the mainspring of the renaissance. And, since the college grew directly from the music school created by Cole, he takes his place in the early pages of this account, as a prime mover of the renaissance.

Cole had devoted most of his working life to the education of the eye. Now, he seemed to be extending his efforts to the education of the other senses. Hearing was cultivated by the music school, taste (in the mouth) by the cookery school. Smell came next. It has been observed that 'public hygiene was the exercise in favour of the olfactory sense that lessons in taste, from Henry Cole and others, were to the visual.73 Cole now turned to hygiene. In 1872, before retiring, he had agreed to help his friend and colleague General Scott launch a new company, which would use the "solid Matter' of sewage to make cement or manure.

Scott had been making scientific experiments for most of his career. At the Royal Engineers depot at Chatham, where he was appointed the first instructor in surveying in 18 5 5, he developed a quick-drying cement, and was encouraged in his work by his commanding officer, Col. Sir William Reid, the same man who had been so obstructive to Cole during the Great Exhibition. Scott took out his first patent, relating to quick lime, in 1856,74 and invented a cement that was used in the new buildings at South Kensington from 1857.75 Continuing to experiment, he took out a patent in 1865 for 'Improvements in the Treatment and Deodorization of Sewage Water'.76 When he came to work at South Kensington, he chose, at George Bartley's suggestion,77 to live at Ealing, which, still an unspoilt village about seven miles west of Hyde Park Corner, was linked to central London by several railways  the Great Western in 1839, the Metropolitan Line in 1863, and eventually the District Line in 1879.78 Scott took a house, Sunnyside, near the parish church and about 10 minutes walk from the station, with several acres of land, orchards, shrubbery, greenhouses, stabling and outhouses.79 This provided plenty of room for 1 children living at home (his 14th and last child was born in 1873),80 together with five indoor staff.81 Nearby Scott had a works, where he pursued his experiments with cement, construction and sewage. He resigned from the army in 1871 with the honorary rank of Major-General, but had never seen active service, and may have been the inspiration for the 'very model of a modern Major-General' in Gilbert and Sullivan's Pirates of Penzance (performed in London for the first time in 1880).

In 1872 Cole helped Scott draft a prospectus for what they agreed to call Scott's p ut ro  he upor s. Lr

Granville said he would subscribe, Lady Derby promised to buy shares, Henry Hunt agreed to be a director, John Fowler and Playfair gave support.8 The company was registered on 10 February 1873, with the duke of Sutherland as chairman. He had a personal interest in sewage treatment, since his enormous country house, Trentham Hall in Staffordshire, stood beside the River Trent and downstream from Stoke-on-Tre Beushe ent n theivee an ais ll a Gilert Rravcar e n  w C Spackman (possibly a relation of Sergeant Spackman of the Sappers?).

Although Scott was always 'sanguine' about the company's prospects,86 not much happened,87 and by June 1875 the company was 'dwindling to nothing'. To rescue it, Cole undertook on 2o July to become managing director. Scott offered to resign, but agreed to stay on.8 His relations with Cole were to worsen, as Cole became more overbearing in the face of difficulties. After Cole 'exploded' at a meeting in 1877, Scott complained: 'Your mine springing policy frightens me as it does others'.89 There were three fronts on which the company had to move forward. One was financial: the technical business of establishing a company and raising cash from shareholders compelled Cole's attendance at numerous meetings in London. Then the company had to obtain its raw material, and this involved journeys up and down England (especially in autumn 187 5) to consult existing local sewage disposal companies, in Rochdale, Oldham, Aldershot, Epping, Nottingham, Stoke-on-Trent and other places; to take the advice of sewage experts (Mr Lobley of Hanley, Mr Tarbottom of Nottingham); and to induce some sewage companies to co-operate with Scott's company as suppliers. Then, thirdly and crucially, there was the conversion of sewage into manure or cement.

This, at first, was a matter of trial and error, for Scott's theories had yet to be proved in practice. At the first works, set up in March 1876 at Saltley, near Birmingham, Charles Spackman had to be given time while he 'worked out the Xperiment'. Success did not come quickly, and nine months later Cole, while conceding that Scott's process was based on 'sound general principles', concluded that 'the carrying them into successful results is still a matter of practical Xperiments which may or may not be successful'.90 Spackman ("seems sensible & active') had to experiment with the chemistry, trying to turn liquid sewage into ammonia by adding phosphate of magnesia, sulphuric acid, or dolomite, and mixing solid sewage ('pail stuff') with charcoal and lime.91 And he had to get the appropriate equipment  pails that would not 'slop' in use, a mechanical stirrer, a still, and coils for the vats  and maintain it, repairing choked pumps, and cracked boilers.2

Cole became deeply involved in all this, taking himself to live in Kenilworth, and then in Birmingham, so as to be able to supervise Spackman closely.93 Since the process was essentially a matter of 'boiling . . . Excreta', an inevitable side effect was smell. Cole was optimistic at first. 'Sludge heating', he thought, produced 'a steam not very disagreeable, . . . like a bakery'. 'Stench hardly perceptible outside & inside not offensive.'94 He assured a Birmingham alderman on 10 November 1876 that 'whatever stench we made' would be got rid of. But by 26 April 1877 he had to confess to failure: 'I admitted that we had three kinds of stinks in our works.' He was hard pressed by the corporation over the 'Nuisance at Saltley' on 29 May, and on miss Cole's presence in Birmingham: I shd not see your round face in New Street produced by turtle, Port wine & burgundy.'

While Cole was thus daily occupied with the earthiest aspects of human life, he felt spiritual longings. The approach of death caused him to take religion more seriously, but the main cause of his new interest was the presence in Birmingham of John Henry Newman, who would be made a cardinal in 1879. In the 1830s Newman had been the leading light in the group of Oxford clergymen and dons who tried to reanimate the hidebound, sluggish Church of England, finding it challenged by a resurgent Roman Catholic Church. They tried to re-connect the Anglican Church with the doctrine and worship of the early church, publishing a series of Tracts for the Times that earned them their name, the 'Tractarian Movement'. The tracts, many written by Newman, ended in 184 1 with his controversial Tract 90. His arguments here led him into a position hardly compatible with Anglicanism, and in 1845 he became a Roman Catholic. After ordination as a Catholic priest he established a branch of the Oratory of St Philip Neri in Birmingham, which was his base for the rest of his life.

When living in Birmingham, Cole and Marian often went on Sundays to hear Mass in the chapel of the Oratorians. 'Cloisters & church good italian altho' by Pugin. Church broad and low & I think good for sound', noted Cole.9s The building was, in fact, by Henry Clutton, and Cole should have known better than to ascribe an Italianate building to the principal enthusiast for everything Gothic. After hearing Newman preach on 24 December 1876, Cole wrote that 'his faith and holiness are so natural & unassumed, whilst his age & feebleness & low but clear speech add greatly to the impressiveness. He gives quite the idea of a Saint & early father of the Church'. Cole was predisposed to admire him, because his vicar in South Kensington, Dr Irons, had described Newman as 'a man who wd be known 2000 years hence with Napoleon & Wellington'.96 Paying a call on Newman on 5 March 1877, Cole found him 'very pleasant in Manner & more vigourous than in the pulpit. He led me to tell him abt Sewage. in whi[ch] he showed an interest . . . . Wd try the manure. if not offensive'. He gave Cole a copy of Tract 9o, which Cole read in the train on his way to London. This treatise, which reinterpreted the Thirty-Nine Articles (the fundamental tenets of the Church of England) in a way that brought them closer to Roman Catholicism, had caused huge contention in 1841 (to which Robert Lowe, among many others, had contributed).97

Cole read Newman's spiritual autobiography, Apologia pro vita sua, making notes and comparing different editions,98 and discussed prayer and theology with Newman.9 Although Cole was an observant member of the Church of England, the 'strong religious faith' imparted by his mother had left him when he got to know Thomas Love Peacock. Thereafter, I retained some faith and a practice in religious observances always,' wrote Cole, 'but they were modified at different periods'100 Peacock, an atheist, had taken an all-or-nothing view of Christian faith. 'Peacock used to say that a logical investigator must be either a Catholic or an Atheist.'11 This was a view with which Newman had some sympathy, and so, it seemed, did Cole. When a friend told Cole that he would be 'greatly disappointed if Newman did not mak   CaolcCoeplhat I    eier H - ily wondered whether he might convert, and at Christmas 1877 Frank Fowke sent his aten-aw home ar showingfgure   papal co tggigoley string towards Rome $\langle p l a t e \ 4 4 \rangle$ . A lifetime's liberal views were not to be shaken off, however. Cole noted down some quotations on religion in his diaries for 1879 and 1880, from Thomas and Matthew Arnold, Coleridge, Mill and Herbert Spencer: the reec ot atoraity butol' e the ifculy  ust faith in the modern world.

Undaunted by failure in Birmingham, Scott's Sewage Company transferred its attentions to Burnley. Work had been in prospect here since early 1876, when, as Cole gloated, 'the sewage committee were o pleased with me' that they entered into an agreement.103 At the sewage works, at Duckpits in a 'charming situation' on the riverbank, the company's machinery was set up,104 while the Saltley works closed down. Spackman was again in charge. Young Granville Cole, soon to complete his studies in chemistry at Berlin and Freiburg with a PhD cum laude,10 also assisted. Cole moved up to live in north Manchester on 14 September 1877, at Lancaster Villa, Broughton Park. He continued to try to promote Scott's company, though problems persisted: 'Cement Elevator not working. Cement shed too small', 'sluices out of order', 'insufficiency of Drying Floor', 'Grinding Mill wont do'. 106 On the first day of 1878 Cole offered himself the usual consolation: 'Promise of working well when defects are remedied.' But several months later Scott's system was still deemed to be 'experimental'. 107 Plans proceeded to establish a works at Blackburn as well as Burnley.108 Spackman left in summer 1878, but Granville Cole continued to be 'fully interested & alive to the work'.109 'Granville in his great sludge boots & billy cock Hat looked business like and handsome,' recorded his proud father.110

Cole invaded the cultural life of Manchester, especially promoting musical activities. Musical church services were early on his agenda,111 and he soon became involved in 'drafting Musical Scheme for Lancashire', which he urged vigorously, especially upon the cathedral and Owens College (later Manchester University). 112 He continued to read Newman and other religious works, made contact with the Catholic cathedral in Salford,113 and obviously developed considerable expertise in recondite areas of Catholic church order: 'Met RC Priest in Train, did not know the Canon prohibiting Percussion instruments.'114 His concern for sewage was not confined to Scott's company. He discussed organising water supply and sewage disposal through river authorities, and took an interest in Manchester's great scheme to pipe fresh water from Thirlmere in the Lake District. 115

Despite his efforts, Scott's company still failed to flourish. Edwin Chadwick, who had devoted most of his life to public health, predicted that the company would fail and, as Cole noted, disapproved of Cole's involvement with it 'as not compatible with my authority &c'. 116 Cole did find a cause worthy of the support of his formidable authority in the general promotion of better sanitation. As ever, he galvanised the Society of Arts, which on 8 November 1875 set up a standing committee on health and sewage of towns. Scores of papers were read at three annual sewage conferences, held in May 1876, 1877 and 1878.117 This exploration of the subject, Hoply in the fourth congress in 1879,119 and thereafter subsided.

In spring 1879 Cole gave up residence in Manchester and returned to the capital, where he took a house in Hampstead, 3 Elm Row, up near the Heath. 120 He plagued his landlord about the drains of the house, and insisted that they were dug up, examined and properly ventilated. 121 He found the journey from the middle of London very tiring. There was no omnibus that went up to Hampstead, so he wrote to the London Omnibus Company asking for one. 122 The railway station at Hampstead Heath was a deep one, with no lift, and he complained about that. Within a year he decided to move down again to Kensington, and he and Richmond and Annie Ritchie exchanged houses, with the Coles moving to 27 Young Street. 123 They were not able to stay there long and he was soon house hunting in Kensington and South Kensington, finally settling, in June 188o, in Earls Court, to the west of both neighbourhoods, taking a short lease of 1o6 Philbeach Gardens. The house was newly built by Edward Mineard, who was raising many houses in the locality, and who, Cole found, was 'unusually interested in the progress of house sanitation, and well acquainted with what his brother builders were doing, and the many systems which sanitary engineers were recommending'.124 Cole agreed to buy 96 Philbeach Gardens, and there Mineard made experiments with ventilating the drains and sewers, which resulted in his taking out a patent, along with Thomas Crapper, in April 188 1.125 Their method was to have soil pipes that reached the roof gutters, so that the rain would help to keep them clear, and a gas ring in a chamber in the basement to draw down the sewer gases and burn them off. Cole described this in a contribution to the Builder, entitled 'A Victory over Sewer Gas', and invited the public to come and view the arrangements.126 Thus the Great Exhibitor made his last stand, exhibiting his own drains.

Cole arranged that Mineard should advise the Prince of Wales on the drains at Sandringham, where Mineard reported 'Bad workmanship in Pipes of all kinds'. He worked with Thomas Crapper and a builder called Weeks to improve the ventilation in the building. When the prince viewed the works 'he went over everything', and, just as fascinated as Cole with the burning off of the sewer gas, 'called people to see the flame going downwards'.127

Back in his old stamping ground of west London, Cole felt better. His health had begun to deteriorate. As early as 1872, even before retirement, he had needed a sleep after lunch, and had been caught napping once by the duke of Sutherland. He had false teeth, which needed to be tightened up from time to time. By 1881, like many old men, he had skin trouble on his legs. Dr Seton recommended that four fifths of his food should be vegetable, and 'said I might live to 9o years' 128 His heart was his weakest spot, and he consulted doctors about it. One told him on  February 1877 that it beat regularly for 3o beats and then missed one. This was little advance on what other doctors had said, but at least this doctor assured him 'that it need not kill me'. Cole took appropriate measures. Once, tired after a speaking engagement, he found his pulse 'feeble and irregular'. 'After a supper of stewed oysters Porter & Whiskey & Water, felt pulse in bed full and regular without stops: very good.'19 He found that he often slept badly, however, and took to recording in his diary the time he woke up and whether he had had a disturbed night. Some of his symptoms of sickness must have been the result of stress, for they cleared up when he left Hampstead. By 8 October he found that 'ostiveness' wich had troubled him, was gone, and he decided to leave off his record of waking-up times as he was sleeping regularly. On the first day of 188 1 he recorded a distinct improvement in health and spirits, noting that the 40 feet ascent to Hampstead was a great physical obstacle'.

Now that he was only two stops on the District Railway from South Kensington, he could not resist the temptation to interfere in his old kingdom. He harried the commissioners. 'He is always driving at something,' said Lord Spencer, chairman of the commissioners' committee of management, 'and one never knows where and when his explosion will come.'30 He assailed the commissioners with pamphlets in 1875, 1876 and 1880,131 arguing in the last that the commissioners should hand back the undeveloped part of the South Kensington site to the government who could then use it entirely and exclusively for purposes of science and art. And he attacked the museum. He was particularly annoyed to find some new object labels drafted by J. C. Robinson (who had a much better relationship with the new director, Philip Owen, than he had had with Cole), which omitted prices. The inclusion of the cost of an article on its label had been one of Cole's fads, and its omission, he thought, amounted to 'Concealment from Public' and was 'against Free trade' 132 He was even more indignant to discover that in summer 188o all the modern works of art had been moved out of the museum to Bethnal Green. This was part of the museum's disengagement with the contemporary and its slide into antiquarianism.133 Among the banished examples of modern art was the Summerly tea set. Cole regarded his tea set as an important historical event, 'a link in the chain of circumstances leading to the Great Exhibition of $_ { \textrm { I } 8 5 \mathrm { T } } ,$ , and had only recently sent a cup and saucer as a birthday present to the Prince of Wales, with a note making this point.14 His pride was severely wounded by its ejection, and he told Owen that if 'the Summerly Art Manufactures were not fixed at the Museum I would ask to have them back'. Convinced that 'SKM was going to the Devil', he tried to get the education minister, A. J. Mundella, to intervene, but had little success and was warned 'not to damage my reputation by personal dislikes'. 135

On the personal level, he was supported by his ever-enlarging family. Tishy and Hennie, who never married, looked after him and Marian (who would outlive her husband by 1o years). They were also often enlisted to help with the National Training School for Cookery, as were any available female relations of Cole. His youngest daughter, Rose, was very active there (despite the distractions of a doomed romance with Herbert Ainger), and wrote the official handbook. 136 Tishy also wrote a textbook,137 and cousin Florence Cole helped. Tishy, now in her 50s, was taken up with good works, particularly what her father called 'old people from Hoxton'.138 Cole's daughter Mary, having married George Bartley, produced four sons - George Henry, Douglas, Bryan and Stanhope - and one daughter, Lillian, with some miscarriages in between (three in 1867).139 Bartley, who started the National Penny Bank in 1874, resigned from the Science and Art Department in 188o to embark on an ultimately successful career as a Conservative MP. Cole's daughter Isabella married Captain Fowke's son, Frank, in 187o, and produced a son, Roger, and two daughters, Joyce and Lettice Joan.

Cole's son Harry had three children by his first wife, Beatrice: Henry Walter George (born 1866), Kathleen Marian (born at the Sanchi Tope in 1870) and George Summerly Carmichael (born 1872). After Bee's death in 1874, Harry married Kate (Catharine Jane) Cooper, and another son was born in 188o. By this time little Harry was at Wellington College. He would follow his father into the Indian army, and emulate his grandfather as an exhibition organiser, eventually becoming another Sir

Henry Cole. Alan Cole, working his way up as an administrator in the Science and Art Department, and also becoming an expert on lace and textiles, married Margy (Margaret Elizabeth) Clark in 1879. 'Young, wilful, heedless, self conscious of her attractiveness, likes to show herself off', wrote Cole. 'But with her sense & loving affectionateness, which is fascinating, I believe she will be a success.'140 She and Alan promptly produced Hilda Margaret Summerly (1879), Brian Lytton (188o) and Muriel Laetitia Summerly (188 1). Thus, at the close of his life, Henry Cole as patriarch could survey eight children and fifteen grandchildren. He was photographed with some of them while on holiday at Hunstanton in autumn 1881 (plate 45). The dog, Jim, died on 30 January 1879. He is buried (like his successor, Tycho) in the garden of the South Kensington Museum, with a commemorative tablet.

Cole was busy eternising himself by writing his autobiography, some parts of which were already in proof in 188 1.141 Visually, he was already commemorated in marble bust and mosaic portrait. A portrait in oils might also have seemed desirable, and such a likeness was being prepared by James McNeill Whistler, who had long known the Coles through Seymour Haden, and had become a close friend of Alan Cole. According to family tradition, he and Alan would go down to the docks to buy blue and white Chinese porcelain from incoming sailors - but modern experts think that they must have gone to dealers. 142 Cole enjoyed drinking tea at Whistler's house 'out of real Chinese & Japanese implements'. Another time he, Marian, Alan and Tishy were given 'an excellent unusual dinner on Chinese & Japanese utensils. picturesque'. They had a 'discussion with Whistler who thought we had got to the finality of art. We had constant roars of laughter and not home until 1 2.30'. 143 Cole went to see the Peacock Room, which Whistler was decorating for the Liverpool shipowner, F. R. Leyland. 'Original', thought Cole. 'Gold & blue with illustrations of Peacocks & their tails. Dashing.' But he correctly noted that 'the Ornament is put upon a room designed in quite another key'. Whistler 'did not wish the Peacocks too much finished, saying it resembled Japanese'. Cole mischievously 'told him his incompleteness reminded me of Mulreadys practice never to complete a picture absolutely lest it should be thought he had perfected it'. To compare the avant-garde Whistler with a traditionalist such as Mulready 'was like holding out a red rag to a bull, 144 but Cole could not resist teasing.

A portrait had been begun in 1876,145 but went astray in 1879 at the sale after Whister bankruptcy. It later repeared,nd Whistler wanted to finist Marci  llh ly a kind of symphony in blacks, in which Whistler aimed (as in several paintings at this time) to 'show what could be done with evening dress, the despair of painters' It showed Cole (plate 48) in a black suit with a dark blue cloak against a dark background, the only touch of colour being the red ribbon of the Order of the Bath. 150

Cole found the standingsincreasingly tiring Symptos  heart disease became o cular pains at the back of left shoulder, & sometimes feeing in front of chest'. He pet Easter, from 8 to 1 Apri withhisold rien the Field Gibsns at Tue Wells. Back in London, he attended a difficult and quarrelsome meeting at the Mutual Assurance Co., and afterwards, having made his contribution to the quarrels, felt so overtaxed that he spent the next day 'very dawdling about, no vigour' and the day a that awsir O the owg y 15 Apri he elt bt was busy dictating letters to Scott's Sewage Company, Guilds of Health, and the Mutual Assurance $\mathrm { C o . , }$ and working on his autobiography. He ate very little, however, and noted his meagre diet in his diary. On 16 April his weakness persisted. On the 17th, Tishy took over writing entries in the diary, to Cole's dictation. He went at midday in a hansom cab to pose again, for the last time, for Whistler. Although Cole was so ill, Whistler seems to have been in no hurry. Alan Cole remembered that 'my father thought that Jimmy had merely touched the light on his shoes, and nothing else, although he stood and sat over an hour and a half'. 152

Back home, Cole suffered 'great discomfort and restlessness all the afternoon .. . . Up & down in both drawing rooms, from sofa to sofa, chair to chair . . . . Dined in small drawing room alone. Little Mutton and pudding . . . . tried to rest. Tried Amyl, no relief. At 1o Dr Seton came. undressed & examined heart & lungs before the fire . . . . Fire in bedroom. Up to bed. with Tishy's help. rested twice on the way. Took Ist dose of new medicine at I1.15. To bed with M[arian]. Restless and wakeful all night.'

The next day, 18 April, Cole had breakfast (egg, toast, bread and butter) in bed with Marian, and the family thought him a little better. A Dr Coates was called in, who 'did not prescribe, except absolute quiet, & no moving out of bed'. Cole was 'very uneasy, breathing short'. In the afternoon a linseed and mustard poultice was applied between his shoulders. It relieved his breathing a little, but the mustard made his back sore. Despite his weakness, Cole still worked on, dictating letters to Tishy. Dr Seton called, prescribing brandy and water every hour and a quarter. But at 7.40 in the evening 'the end came, in a few seconds'. After this last entry in the diary that Cole had kept up almost every day since 1822, Tishy wrote: 'Written up by my dearest father's desire.'

## Conclusion

Cole was buried on Saturday 22 April, a day of heavy rain. The funeral service was at St Matthias, West Brompton. The coffin was followed by all the family except Harry (who was on duty in India), together with Donnelly, and Sir Dighton Probyn representing the Prince of Wales. At the church were Lord Granville, the government ministers Lord Spencer and Mr Mundella, and almost everyone connected with the Department of Science and Art, including Redgrave, now almost blind. It was quite a high church service, with four clergy wearing stoles and birettas. The coffin, draped in a purple pall, stood between six candles. There was no choral music, but Arthur Sullivan played the organ. A tribute was given by Canon W. J. Knox-Little of Manchester. He rightly said that 'in that work which God had sent him to do' Cole 'had left his mark behind'. Like everybody else, Knox-Little had been impressed by Cole's 'astonishing spirit of energetic enterprise', which 'characterized him even in his later years, when he seemed to have the heart of a boy with the mind of a man in the very vigour of life'. Interestingly, the canon also praised Cole's 'large-heartedness' in religion. 'There was nothing of the bitterness of theological dispute in the workings of a mind that, in the later years with which the speaker was personally conversant, was strictly and really religious.' At Brompton Cemetery workmen from South Kensington carried the coffin from the gates to the grave, while the Sappers provided a guard of honour.1

## \* \*\*\*

After his death, Cole was credited with almost miraculous powers as a reformer of taste. In 1885 it was claimed that, through his efforts at the Department of Science and Art, 'the English people were converted from Philistinism, and became ardent lovers of art. In the poorest cottages may now be found vessels of artistic design and other delights of the eye, as cheap as the ugly patterns which obtained everywhere except in the houses of the richest a few years ago.2

In 1897, at the time of the Queen's jubilee, it still seem plausible to repeat this extravagant claim:

I ri   that y o  walls, he de   urure the spene picu ct fro illus p   wi  c ti  t xet  h

Kensington penetrated into every corner of the land, and made their humanizing influ-

Time erodes all achievements, and it was not long before Cole seemed to have been forgotten. When the new building for the South Kensington Museum, now re-named the Victoria and Albert Museum, was opened on 26 June 1909, an article in The T ay , some of the experts' who had acquired the collections. Among these it singled out who is still living, and who, we hope will be preent at today's cereoy  Sir J. C. Robinson'4 But Cole was not mentioned. This provoked a letter of protest from the secretary of the Society of Arts, Sir Henry Trueman Wood, regretting that there had been 'not a word of recognition' for Cole.5

It is hardly surprising, perhaps, that Cole's achievements could be forgotten quite quickly. For Cole was above all a man who got things done. People who get things done are indispensable to the conduct of life, and are usually admired or respected at the time when they are in action. But, later on, when the time comes to commemorate their achievements, they often fare badly. Quieter people who have left behind artistic productions or published writings fare better, since they have to some extent created their own memorial in their works. Some people's deeds are momentous enough to be memorable: heroic figures who have fought battles, climbed mountains, discovered continents, or won beautiful women, may well be remembered for these exploits. But those who have discharged the business of life have little claim on our memory. What is done is soon done with, as the next practical problem arises: effective administrators create the conditions in which their own achievements will be superseded. Efficient activists, such as Cole, working within systems, often tend to disappear.

On his own patch, in South Kensington, Cole was never quite forgotten, even though overshadowed by subsequent developments there. And his fortunes have revived somewhat in that region: today there is a Henry Cole Room in the Royal Albert Hall; and when the School of Naval Architecture was taken over as an extension to the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1983 it was renamed 'The Henry Cole Wing'. But Cole was hardly remembered in the world at large, unless as the inventor of the adhesive postage stamp or the originator of the Christmas card. It is in the latter capacity that he today earns most of his appearances (many fancifully inaccurate) on the World Wide Web.

Nowadays the work to which Cole dedicated his life might be seen as a contribution to (in Richard Johnson's apt phrase) 'the cultural aggressions of nineteenth-century authority'.6 Viewed in that light, it obviously lies open now to criticism, though at least the subject is studied and Cole is prominent, if, by some authors, debunked. If the value of his work is ambiguous, so also his personality evokes varied responses. A biography of him has to take into account that, for all his virtues, he was disliked by many whom he conquered.

His redeeming feature is not just that he made things happen, but that in doing so he displayed inexhaustible energy, ingenuity, boldness and humour. This amounted to much more than administrative efficiency. A lustre can be reflected on to his achievement from a judgement passed on his great adversary, Robert Lowe.

Despite Lowe's brilliance and force as a politician, it has been said that: 'His policy was to administer what was there. It was in no sense creative.'7 Cole's work, on the other hand, was indisputably creative. Even though he was not an artist but an administrator, he left behind in the world many things that would not have been there but for his restless inventiveness, and the spectacle of Henry Cole in full steam (as portrayed, we hope, in this book) is exhilarating and invigorating.

## Abbreviations

In endnotes, references in the form Bonython es n he Biloy.

References in the form HC 1834.1 are to items in the Appendix: Henry Cole's principal pronouncements.

References in the form HCD 24 Jul 1834 are to Henry Cole's Diary. The original volumes, covering the years 1822-34, 1837-54, 1856-82, are in the Special Collections of the National Art Library (NAL), where there is also a typed transcript and index by Elizabeth Bonython.

EAN Henry Cole, Early autobiographical notes, typescript copy, edited by Alan S. Cole. In Special Collections, NAL. This typescript is jumbled, and hence erratically paginated.

Fifty Henry Cole (ed. Alan and Henrietta Cole), Fifty years of public work of Sir Henry Cole, K.C.B. accounted for in his deeds, speeches and writings, 2 vols (London: Bell, 1884).

Miscellanies A series of 17 bound volumes, containing printed and other material preserved by Henry Cole as a record of his own life. In Special Collections, NAL.

Cole Correspondence The NAL houses 19 boxes of letters to Cole (with just a few drafts of letters from him). These are grouped according to correspondent, as indicated in the NAL catalogue, but are not as yet fully listed and located. Work on cataloguing them is soon to begin, but for the moment some references remain imprecise.

Survey Survey of London. . . Volume XXXVI-II. The museums area of South Kensington and Westminster, published for the Greater London Council (London: University of London, Athlone Press, 1975).

JSA Journal of the Society of Arts [from 1909 . .. the Royal Society of Arts], 1852-the present.

First Report [for 1853], Second Report [for 1854], etc. These refer to the annual printed reports of the Department of Science and Art, each volume being issued in the year following the year on which it reported.

Précis The papers of the Board of the Department of Science and Art are held in the Public Record Office. A printed Précis of Board Minutes was periodically produced, recording decisions taken, in summary form. Volumes in this series (available in the NAL) are referred to as Précis, followed by dates indicating a particular volume.

Hansard Hansard's Parliamentary debates (London: Baldwin and Cradock, 1829-91).

V&A Press Cuttings Press cuttings were kept by the Victoria and Albert Museum in albums, arranged in various ways over the years. These may be consulted in the NAL's Archive of Art and Design at Blythe House, Kensington, where a list is kept. References in the endnotes give dates and other formulae necessary to identify a particular volume.

Cole Collection Cuttings Book A collection of cuttings, in 2 volumes, made by Cole late in life. In Special Collections, NAL, press-mark 55.AA.32.

HMSO Her (His) Majesty's Stationery Office.

NAL The National Art Library in the V&A.

PRO Public Record Office.

U.P. University Press.

## Notes

## Introduction

I 'Mr. Cole's appeal to the country', Architect (1 Nov1873), p.224.

2 In the 'Minor Topics of the Month' column, Art-Journal(1863), p.191.

3 The abdication of Mr. Cole', Architect (12 Jun 1873), p.13.

4 Henry Trueman Wood, letter to The Times (Monday 28 Jun 1909), p.1O.

5 'The Cole Testimonial', Daily Telegrapb (12 Jul 1873), V&A Press Cuttings, Jun 1870-Dec 1874, vol. 2, p.160.

6 Trueman Wood, op. cit.

7 C. Henry Whitaker, 'The proposed testimonial to Mr. Henry Cole, C.B.', letter in Builder (5 Jul 1873), p.532.

8 'Two pen-and-ink sketches . . . I. The Department of Aesthetics and Commonplace', St Paul's Magazine (Mar 1872),p.243.

Newton Price, [Review of Cole's Fifty Years], Nature (5 Feb 1885), p.309.

1 Price, op. cit., p.311.

II Reid (1899), p.14.

12 Denis (1995), p.209.

13 'Mr. Cole's appeal .. .', op. cit., p.223.

14 Trueman Wood, op. cit.

15 HCD 12 Jul 1851, 30Jul 1851, 26 Apr 1852, 14 Oct 1852, 28 Jan 1853,19 Jul 1860, 28 Jul 1859,5 Jul 1864, 14 Jun 1864, 3 Dec 1864, 17 Jun 1868, 5 Mar 1872, 4 May 1872, 20 Nov 1872.

16 HCD 19 Feb 1856, 16 Mar 1865, 2 Mar 1870,6 Dec 1866, 10 Apr 1869, 13 Mar 1872.

17 HCD 29 Jan 1852, 24 Feb 1862, I Jun 1869

18 HCD 8 Dec 1865, 2 Apr 1868.

19'Sir Henry Cole, K.C.B.' [obituary], Athenaeum (22 Apr 1882), p.509.

2 'Obituary', JSA (21 Apr 1882), P.575.

21 The Hornet (22 January 1873) in Cole Collection Cuttings Book, vol.1, p.151.

22 For a study of how Cole absorbed and manipulated the political and artistic culture of his time, see Goodwin (199o). For a view of Cole as carried on a current of state policies and economic imperatives, see Purbrick (1994). For a pungent exposition of the role of military discipline and bureaucratic secrecy in the institutional ethos shaped by Cole, see Denis (1995a). 23 See, for instance, Sutton (1967), Carline (1968), Macdonald (1970).

24The works of W.H.G Armytage always

acknowledge the Department of Science and Art. A particularly useful book in this respect is Bishop (1971).

25 Butterworth (1968) is a contribution to educational history, a mine of detailed information. Levine (1989) approaches the department from the viewpoint of design history. Cooper (1992) stresses the breadth of Cole's connections. Denis (1995) compares the Department's work (in Part II. 'Science and Art Departmentalized, 1852-75') to that of other agencies in art education.

26 HC1852.3,p.6.

27 Denis (1995a), p.11. Taylor (1999), p.74.

28 Rifkin (1988), p.101.

29 See chapter 6 in Alexander (1983).

3 Bennett (1995), p.102.

31 Finer (1972) in Sutherland (1972), p.13.

32 Lubenow (1971).

33 Cf. Brundage (1988).

34 Cf. Mandler (1990).

35 Henriques (1979).

36 But see Hemingway (1992).

37 Clarke (1973) in Stansky (1973).

38 Denis (1995), p.177, presents Cole as a sort of spoiled utilitarian, who failed to sustain the social agenda of such reforming civil servants as Chadwick, but revelled in administrative reform for its own sake, as he remorselessly expanded his Department of Science and Art.

3 'The abdication of Mr. Cole', Architect (12 Jun 1873), p.13.

4But see Part One, 'Administrative History' in Butterworth (1968) and chapter 6 in Levine (1989).

41 Perkin (1969), p.270.

42 For a summing up of work on the nineteenth-century revolution in government, the civil service, and professionalism, see Roy MacLeod, "Introduction' in MacLeod (1988),pp.1-24.

43 Both quoted in Read (1964), pp.120, 150.

44 'Suggestions for the management of the Schools of Design' in HC 1849.I para. 1888.

45 HC 1856.1, vol.3, P.415.

46 Gay (1988), p.242.

47 Cf. Richards (1990), Hamon (1992).
