> 来源：In the Bubble. Designing in a Complex World (Thackara John)
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\In the Bubble. Designing in a Complex World (Thackara John)\In the Bubble. Designing in a Complex World (Thackara John).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## 39. Carroll, Making Use, 8.

40. Eugenio Barba, address to the Institute Superior de Artes on the occasion of its awarding him an honorary doctorate, Havana, Cuba, February 6, 2002, available at http://www.odinteatret.dk/general\_information/pdf\_filer/havanaenglish.pdf. See also Eugenio Barba, The Paper Canoe: A Guide to Theatre Anthropology (London: Routledge, 1995).

What to Read Next

## Ten Books to Read Next

Bentley, Tom. Learning beyond the Classroom: Education for a Changing World. London: Routledge/Demos, 1998.

Benyus, Janine. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature. New York: Morrow, 1997.

Calvino, Italo. Six Memos for the Next Millennium. London: Cape, 1992.

Carroll, John M. Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003.

Elbek, Uffe, ed. KaosPilot A–Z. Aarhus, Denmark: KaosPilots, 2004.

Fernandez-Galiano, Luis. Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.

Hawken, Paul, Amory B. Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins. Natural Capitalism: The Next Industrial Revolution. London: Earthscan, 1999.

Levine, Robert. A Geography of Time: The Temporal Misadventures of a Social Psychologist. New York: Basic Books, 1997.

Rheingold, Howard. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 2003.

Seely Brown, John, and Paul Duguid. The Social Life of Information. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.

## A Book a Week for a Year

Agamben, Giorgio. The Man without Content. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999.

Bentley, Tom. Learning beyond the Classroom: Education for a Changing World. London: Routledge/Demos, 1998.

Benyus, Janine. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature. New York: Morrow, 1997.

Beukers, Adriaan, and Ed van Hinte. Lightness: The Inevitable Renaissance of Minimum Energy Structures. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1998.

Brand, Stewart. How Buildings Learn—What Happens after They Are Built. New York: Penguin, 1994.

Calvino, Italo. Six Memos for the Next Millennium. London: Vintage, 1996.

Carroll, John M. Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003.

Ceppi, Giulio, Analia Cervini, and Juan Keyser. Mobile Embodiments: New Convergences in Mobile Telephony. Ivrea, Italy: Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, 2004.

Dinkler, Soke, and Christoph Brockhaus, eds. Connected Cities: Processes of Art in the Urban Network. Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 1999.

Duffy, Francis. Architectural Knowledge. London: Spon, 1998.

Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. Medicine and Power: A Tribute to Ivan Illich (Paris: Centre National de Recherche Scientifique [CNRS], 2003.

Dyson, Esther. Release 2.0: A Design for Living in the Digital Age. New York: Bantam Dell, 1997.

Elbek, Uffe, ed. KaosPilot A–Z. Aarhus, Denmark: KaosPilots, 2004.

Ferna´ndez-Galiano, Luis. Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.

Gladwell, Malcolm. The Tipping Point. New York: Little Brown, 2000.

Goldberg, Ken, ed. The Robot in the Garden: Telerobotics and Telepistemology in the Age of the Internet. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.

Gombrich, E. H. The Sense of Order. London: Phaidon, 1979.

Goonatilake, Susantha. Toward a Global Science: Mining Civilizational Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998.

Gray, John. Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Animals. London: Granta, 2002.

Hajer, Maarten, and Arnold Reijndorp. In Search of New Public Domain: Analysis and Strategy. Rotterdam: Netherlands Architecture Institute, 2001.

Hawken, Paul, Amory B. Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins. Natural Capitalism: The Next Industrial Revolution. London: Earthscan, 1999.

Himanen, Pekka. The Hacker Ethic, and the Spirit of the Information Age. New York: Random House, 2001.

Holloway, Richard. Looking in the Distance: The Human Search for Meaning. Edinburgh: Canongate, 2004.

Hunt, Tristram. Building Jersusalem: The Rise and Fall of the Victorian City. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2004.

Illich, Ivan. Deschooling Society. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1976.

Illich, Ivan. Energy and Equity. London: Calder and Boyars, 1974.

Je´gou, Franc¸ois, and Ezio Manzini. Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions. Milan: Edizione Ambiente, 2004.

La´szlo´ Baraba´si, Albert. Linked: The New Science of Networks. New York: Perseus, 2002.

Laurel, Brenda. Utopian Entrepreneur. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.

Lessig, Lawrence. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. New York: Random House, 2001.

Levine, Robert. A Geography of Time: The Temporal Misadventures of a Social Psychologist. New York: Basic Books, 1997.

Lietar, Bernard. The Future of Money. London: Century, 2001.

Manguel, Alberto. A History of Reading. London: Harper Collins, 1996.

Mast, Gregory, ed. Film Theory and Criticism. 5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.

Mulgan, Geoff. Connexity: How to Live in a Connected World. London: Chatto and Windus, 1997.

Orr, David. Ecological Literacy: Education and the Transition to a Postmodern World. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992.

P.M. (pseudonym). Bolo Bolo. New York: Autonomedia, 1995.

Rheingold, Howard. Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 2003.

Rifkin, Jeremy. Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989.

Ross, Andrew. Strange Weather: Culture, Science and Technology in the Age of Limits. London: Verso, 1991.

Roszak, Theodore, Mary E. Gomes, and Allen D. Kanner, eds. Ecopsychology. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1995.

Schechner, Richard. Performance Studies: An Introduction. London: Routledge, 2002.

Schlosser, Eric. Fast Food Nation. New York: Perennial, 2002.

Seely Brown, John, and Paul Duguid. The Social Life of Information. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.

Sonnabend, Regina. Serve City: Interactive Urbanism. Berlin: Jovis Verlag, 2003.

van Hinte, Ed, Marc Neelan, Jacques Vink, and Piet Vollaard. Smart Architecture. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 2003.

Vincent, Julian V. F. Structural Biomaterials. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998.

von Weizsa¨cker, Ernst, Amory Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins. Factor Four: Doubling Wealth, Halving Resource Use. London: Earthscan, 1997.

Wilson, Edward O. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. London: Little Brown, 1998.

Worpole, Ken, and Liz Greenhalgh. The Richness of Cities: Urban Policy in a New Landscape. London: Comedia/Demos, 1999.

Zimmerman, Brenda, Curt Lindberg, and Paul Plsek. Edgeware: Complexity Resources for Health Care Leaders. Irving, Texas: VHA Inc. (Plexus Institute), 2001.

Alakeson, Vidhaya, ed. Making the Net Work: Sustainable Development in a Digital Society. London: Forum for the Future/Xeris, 2003.

Alexander, Christopher, Sara Ishikawa, and Murray Silverstein. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977.

Alexander, Titus. Family Learning. London: Demos, 1997.

Antonelli, Paola. Mutant Materials. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1996.

Antonelli, Paola. Workspheres: Design and Contemporary Work Styles. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2001.

Bakker, Conny, ed. Smart Materials. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1997.

Barba, Eugenio. The Paper Canoe: A Guide to Theatre Anthropology. London: Routledge, 1999.

Barley, Nick, ed. Breathing Cities: The Architecture of Movement. Basel, Boston, and Berlin: Birkhauser, 2000.

Bauman, Zygmunt. Liquid Modernity. Cambridge, England: Polity, 2000.

Beolchi, Luciano, ed. Telemedicine Glossary. Brussels: European Commission, 2003.

Bergson, Henri. Duration and Simultaneity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.

Berners-Lee, Tim. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web. New York: Harper Collins, 1999.

Birkenshaw, Julian, and Peter Hagstrom, eds. The Flexible Firm: Capability Management in Network Organizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Boekraad, Hughes, ed. The New Academy: Papers for the Barcelona Symposium. Breda, The Netherlands: Academy St. Joost, 1997.

Bonsiepe, Gui. Interface: An Approach to Design. Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academy, 1998.

Boutinet, Jean-Pierre. Anthropologie du Projet. Paris: PUF, 2003.

Bradburne, James. Collecting Interaction: Digital Craft and the Museum of the Twenty-First Century. Unpublished paper, Museum of Applied Arts Frankfurt, 2000.

Bradburne, James. Digital Craft. Unpublished paper, Museum of Applied Arts Frankfurt, 2000.

Braddock, S. E., and Marie O’Mahony. Techno-Textiles: Revolutionary Fabrics for Fashion and Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 1998.

Brand, Jan, Ritsaert ten Cate, Akki Colenbrander, and Catelijne de Muijnk. The Art Academy of the 21st Century. Bedum, The Netherlands: Profiel, 1999.

Brand, Stewart. How Buildings Learn—What Happens after They Are Built. New York: Penguin, 1994.

Brand, Stewart. The Clock of the Long Now: Time and Responsibility. London: Phoenix, 2000.

Brezet, Han, Philip Vergragt, and Tom van der Horst, eds. Vision on Sustainable Product Innovation. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2001.

Brickwood, Cathy, ed. New Media Culture in Europe. Amsterdam: De Balie, 1999.

Capra, Fritjof. The Web of Life. New York: Random House, 1996.

Castells, Manuel. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. 2nd ed. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2000.

Ceppi, Giulio, and Michele Zini, eds. Children, Spaces, Relationships: Metaproject for an Environment for Young Children. Milan: Domus Academy, 1998.

Changeux, Jean-Pierre, and Paul Ricoeur. Ce qui nous fait penser: Le nature et le regle (What Makes Us Think: Nature and Law). Paris: Odile Jacob, 2000.

Chion, Michel. Audio-Vision. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.

Cohen, Daniel. Our Modern Times: The New Nature of Capitalism in the Information Age. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003.

Cooper, Alan. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum. Indianapolis: SAMS (Macmillan Computer Publishing), 1999.

Corbin, Alain. Time, Desire and Horror: Towards a History of the Senses. Cambridge, England: Polity, 1995.

Cottam, Hilary, and Charles Leadbeater. Health: Co-creating Services. London: Design Council, 2004.

Croall, Jonathan. LETS Act Locally: The Growth of Local Exchange Trading Systems. London: Gulbenkian, 1997.

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention. New York: Harper, 1996.

Culshaw, B. Smart Structures and Materials. London: Artech House, 1965.

Cusveller, Sjoerd, Oene Dijk, and Kirsten Schipper. Remaking NL: Cityscape, Landscape, Infrastructure. Amsterdam: S@M, 2001.

Davidson, Robyn, ed. The Picador Book of Journeys. London: Pan Macmillan, 2000.

Davis, Mike. Beyond Bladerunner: Urban Control and the Ecology of Fear. New York: New Press, 1993.

de Kerckhove, Derrick. The Skin of Culture: Investigating the New Electronic Reality. Toronto: Somerville House, 1995.

de Landa, Manuel. A Thousand Years of Nonlinear History. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997.

DiBona, Chris, Sam Ockman, and Mark Stone, eds. Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly, 1999.

Dinkler, Soke, and Christoph Brockhaus, eds. Connected Cities: Processes of Art in the Urban Network. Ostfildern-Ruit, Germany: Hatje Cantz Verlag, 1999.

Dourish, Paul. Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.

Downs, Anthony. Still Stuck in Traffic: Coping with Peak-Hour Traffic Congestion. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2004.

Ducatel, Ken, and James P. Gavigan. Employment and Employability in 2010 Europe.

Seville: Institute of Prospective Technological Studies, Joint Research Centre, Commission of the European Community, 2000.

Dudek, Mark. Kindergarten Architecture: Space for the Imagination. London: Chapman and Hall, 1996.

Dunbar, Robin. Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997.

Dunne, Anthony, and Fiona Raby. Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects. London: August/Birkha¨user, 2001.

Dupuy, Jean-Pierre. Medicine and Power: A Tribute to Ivan Illich. Paris: Ecole Polytechnique, Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 2003.

Ehrlich, Paul. New World, New Mind. London: Paladin, 1991.

Ferry, Luc. The New Ecological Order. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.

Florida, Richard. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming Work, Leisure, Community, and Everyday Life. New York: Perseus Books, 2002.

Flusser, Vilem. The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design. London: Reaktion, 1999.

Forseba¨ck, Lennart. Case Studies of the Information Society and Sustainable Development.

Brussels: European Commission Information Society Directorate General, 2000.

Forsyth, Richard. Machine Learning. London: Chapman and Hall, 1989.

Gandhi, Mukesh V., and Brian S. Thompson. Smart Materials and Structures. London: Chapman and Hall, 1990.

Gardner, Howard. The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How Schools Should Teach. New York: Basic Books, 1993.

Graham, Stephen, and Simon Marvin. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities, and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge, 2001.

Gray, Alasdair. Lanark: A Life in Four Books. Glasgow: Canongate, 1985.

Gray, Charles Hable, ed. The Cyborg Handbook. London: Routledge, 1995.

Griffiths, Jay. Pip-Pip: A Sideways Look at Time. London: Flamingo, 2000.

Hall, Edward T. The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday, 1959.

Hamilton, Clive. Growth Fetish. London: Pluto, 2004.

Hampden-Turner, Charles, and Fons Trompenaars. Mastering the Infinite Game: How East Asian Values Are Transforming Business Practices. London: Capstone, 1997.

Hargreaves, David. The Mosaic of Learning: Schools and Teachers for the Next Century. London: Demos, 1994.

Heppell, Stephen. Schools in the Learning Age. London: Campaign for Learning, 2000.

Herz, J. C. Joystick Nation: How Videogames Gobbled Our Money, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds. London: Abacus, 1997.

Hillis, W. Daniel. The Pattern on the Stone. New York: Basic Books, 1999.

Hillman, Mayer, and Stephen Plowden. Speed Control and Transport Policy. London: Policy Studies Institute, 1996.

Hilty, Lorenz M., and T. F. Ruddy. Resource Productivity in the Information Age. Chapter 3 in Indicators of Sustainable Development, edited by Olli Hietanen. Helsinki: Finnish Society for Future Studies, 2002.

Hofmeester, Kay, ed. Presence: New Media for Older People. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1999.

Holland, John H. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1975.

Horton, William. Designing and Writing Online Documentation. New York: Wiley, 1994.

Huizinga, Johan. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. Boston: Beacon Press, 1955.

Hussey, Andrew. The Game of War: The Life and Death of Guy Debord. London: Cape, 2001.

Hutton, Will, and Anthony Giddens, eds. On the Edge: Living with Global Capitalism. London: Vintage, 1999.

Illich, Ivan. Tools for Conviviality. London: Calder and Boyars, 1973.

Information Society Technology Advisory Group (ISTAG). Scenarios for Ambient Intelligence in 2010. Seville, Spain: Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, 2001.

Irving, Robert. Being and Circumstance: Notes towards a Conditional Art. San Francisco: Lapis with the Pace Gallery, 1988.

Johnson, Robert R. User-Centered Technology: A Rhetorical Theory. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998.

Johnston, Peter, ed. Information Societies Technologies Conference. Helsinki: European Commission, 2000.

Jones, John Chris. Softecnica. In Design after Modernism: Beyond the Object in Design, edited by John Thackara, 216–226. London: Thames and Hudson, 1987.

Kafai, Yasmin B., and Mitch Resnick. Construction in Practice: Designing, Thinking, Learning in a Digital World. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1996.

Kelly, Kevin. Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World. New York: Perseus, 1995.

Kennedy, Margrit. Interest and Inflation Free Money. Sydney: Social Entrepreneurial Ventures Asia, 1995.

Krausse, Joachim, and Claude Lichtenstein, eds. Your Private Sky: R. Buckminster Fuller and The Art of Design Science. London: Mu¨ller/Birkha¨user Verlag, 1999.

Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Landauer, Thomas K. The Trouble with Computers: Usefulness, Usability, and Productivity. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.

Latour, Bruno, and Catherine Porter. Aramis: Or the Love of Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Laurel, Brenda. Computers as Theatre. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1991.

Laurel, Brenda, ed. Design Research: Methods and Perspectives. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003.

Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Lawrence, Eleanor, ed. Henderson’s Dictionary of Biological Terms. 11th ed. London: Longman, 1995.

Maas, Winy. Five Minute City: Architecture and (Im)mobility. Rotterdam: Episode, 2003.

Maas, Winy, and Jacob van Rijs. FARMAX: Excursions on Density. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1998.

Mamet, David. Three Uses of the Knife: On the Nature and Purpose of Drama. New York: Vintage, 1998.

Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001.

Manzini, Ezio. Artefatti: Verso una nuova ecologia dell’ambiente artificiale (Artifacts: Toward a New Ecology of the Artificial Environment). Milan: Edizioni Domus Academy, 1990 (published in French and Spanish).

Manzini, Ezio. HK Lab. Hong Kong: Portefaix Map, 2002.

Manzini, Ezio. The Material of Invention. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.

Manzini, Ezio. Product-Service Systems and Sustainability. Paris: United Nations Environment Programme, 2002.

Manzini, Ezio. Solution Oriented Partnership: How to Design Industrialised Sustainable Solutions. Cranfield, England: Cranfield University Press, 2004.

Manzini, Ezio, and Marco Susani. The Solid Side. Naarden, The Netherlands: V þ K, 1995.

Manzini, Ezio, and Carlo Vezzoli. Product-Service Systems and Sustainability: Opportunities for Sustainable Solutions. Paris: United Nations Education Programme, 2003.

Maxmin, James, and Shoshana Zuboff. The Support Economy. New York: Viking, 2002.

McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.

McCullough, Malcolm. Digital Ground. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004.

McNeill, J. R., and William H. McNeill. The Human Web: A Bird’s Eye View of World History. New York: Norton, 2003.

Millar, Jeremy, and Michiel Schwarz, eds. Speed: Visions of an Accelerated Age. London: Photographers’ Gallery, 1998.

Mitchell, William J. The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-photographic Era. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.

Miyake, Riiche, and John Thackara, eds. T-Zone. Brussels: Europalia, 1990.

Mok, Clement. Designing Business. San Jose, Calif.: Adobe, 1996.

Mulder, Arjen. Levende systemen: reis naar het einde van het informatietidperk (Living Systems: Travels to the End of the Information Age). Amsterdam: Van Gennep, 2002.

Mulder, Arjen, and Jacqueline Tellinga. L’Europe a\` Grande Vitesse (High-Speed Europe). Rotterdam: Netherlands Architecture Institute, 1996.

Nevejan, Caroline. Synchroon-asynchroon: Onderwijsvernieuwing in de informatiesamenleving (Synchronous-Asynchronous: Educational Renewal in the Information Society). Amsterdam: Hogeschool van Amsterdam, 2003.

Norman, Donald A. Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1993.

Normann, Richard. Reframing Business. London: Wiley, 2003.

Norretranders, Tor. The User Illusion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size. New York: Viking, 1998.

Papanek, Victor. Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change. New York: Random House, 1972.

Phillips, Adam. The Beast in the Nursery. London: Pantheon, 1998.

Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958.

Rifkin, Jeremy. The Age of Access. London: Penguin, 2000.

Rifkin, Jeremy. The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-market Era. New York: Putnam, 1995.

Roberts, Paul. Images: The Piano Music of Claude Debussy. New York: Amadeus, 1996.

Sachs, Wolfgang. The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed, 1992.

Sachs, Wolfgang. Global Ecology: A New Arena of Political Conflict. London: Zed, 1993.

Sahlins, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1972.

Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: The Industrialization of Time and Space in the Nineteenth Century. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1987.

Scho¨n, Donald. The Reflective Practitioner—How Professionals Think. New York: Basic Books, 1983.

Schor, Juliet B. The Overspent American: Upscaling, Downshifting, and the New Consumer. New York: Basic Books, 1998.

Schwarz, Michiel. Holland schept ruimte: Het Nederlands paviljoen op de wereldtentoonstelling EXPO 2000 te Hannover (Holland Makes Space: The Dutch Pavilion at Expo 2000 in Hannover). Blaricum/Den Haag: V þ K, 1999.

Seelig, Thomas, Urs Stahel, and Margin Joeggi, eds. Trade: Commodities, Communication and Consciousness. Zurich: Scalo, 2001.

Simon, Herbert. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996.

Smith, Mark K. Online Encyclopedia of Informal Education. Available at http://www .infed.org/association/b-assoc.htm. 2002.

Soja, Edward W. Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory. London: Verso, 1989.

Sontag, Susan. Regarding the Pain of Others. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2003.

Sorkin, Michael, and Sharon Zukin, eds. After the World Trade Center: Rethinking New York City. New York: Routledge, 2002.

Sudjic, Deyan. The 100 Mile City. London: Harper Collins, 1993.

Svanaes, Dag. Understanding Interactivity: Steps to a Phenomenology of Human-Computer Interaction. Trondheim, Norway: Computer Science Department, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 2000.

Thackara, John. Lost in Space: A Traveller’s Tale. Haarlem, The Netherlands: De Grafische Haarlem, 1994.

Thackara, John. Winners! How Today’s Successful Companies Innovate by Design. London: Gower, 1999.

Thackara, John, ed. Design after Modernism: Beyond the Object in Design. London: Thames and Hudson, 1987.

Tukker, Arnold, Peter Eder, and Erick Haag. Ecodesign: The European State of the Art. Seville, Spain: Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, 2000.

Uricchio, William. Media, Simultaneity, Convergence: Culture and Technology in an Age of Intermediality. Utrecht, The Netherlands: Universiteit Utrecht, 1997.

van Assche, Christine, ed. Sonic Process. Barcelona: Actar, 2002.

van Hinte, Ed. Eternally Yours: Visions on Product Endurance. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1997.

van Hinte, Ed. Smart Design. Amsterdam: Netherlands Design Institute, 1999.

van Hinte, Ed, and Conny Bakker. Trespassers: Inspirations for Eco-efficient Design. Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1998.

Vincent, Julian V. F. Borrowing the Best from Nature. In Encyclopaedia Britannica, 168–187. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1995.

Virilio, Paul, and Mark Polizzotti. Speed and Politics: An Essay on Dromology. New York: Semiotext(e), 1986.

Vogel, Steven. Life’s Devices: The Physical World of Animals and Plants. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.

Wackernagel, Mathis, and William Rees. Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human Impact on the Earth. Canada: New Society, 1996.

Weber, Steven. The Success of Open Source. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004.

Wenger, Etienne, Richard McDermott, and William M. Snyder. Cultivating Communities of Practice. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School Press.

Williams, David, ed. Collaborative Theatre: The The´aˆtre du Soleil Sourcebook. London: Routledge, 1999.

Whitelegg, John. Critical Mass: Transport Environment and Society in the Twenty-First Century. London: Pluto, 1997.

Whitelegg, John, and Gary Haq, eds. The Earthscan Reader in World Transport Policy and Practice. London: Earthscan, 2003.

Winograd, Terry, and Fernando Flores. Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1987.

Yeang, Ken. Bioclimatic Skyscrapers. London: Artemis, 1994.

## Index

2001: A Space Odyssey, 172

3-D systems, 66   
3D Visible Enterprise, 169, 171   
3G technology, 47   
Aarstiderne, 40   
Abalones, 188   
Acceleration. See Speed   
Accenture, 120   
Adhesives, 188   
Advanced Computing Systems   
Association (USENIX), 244n50   
Advertising, 73–75, 161–162   
AEG, 199   
Aerogels, 193   
Africa, 55   
Agile Alliance, 111, 223–224   
Aging, 121–123, 256n32   
Agriculture, 31–32, 58–59, 89–90   
Agritime, 41   
Agri-tourism, 39   
Aguirre, Cris, 165–166   
Ahtisaari, Marko, 87   
Aircraft, 3, 52, 240n4   
light design and, 193–196   
Airlines, 53, 106–108, 198–199   
code-sharing tickets and, 57–58   
cost and, 101–103   
Air pollution   
‘‘Asian brown cloud,’’ 10   
carbon dioxide and, 15, 20, 22, 53, 178,   
240n4   
Airports, 182, 233n30   
flow and, 100–103, 106–107   
Heathrow, 52, 102   
music for, 175   
ontological alienation and, 100–103   
Schiphol, 105, 107–108, 251n19   
urban planning and, 100–103, 106–   
108

Akamai, 69

Alexander, Christopher, 80–81

Algeria, 35

Alternative fuels, 59

Always-on mode, 37–38

Ambient intelligence (AmI), 204– 209

American Nervousness (Beard), 35

Amsterdam Medical Centre (AMC), 118–119

Amsterdam Real Time, 84

Amtrak, 207

Ancient Medicine: Airs, Waters, Places (Hippocrates), 214–215

Andaman Islands, 177–178

Andersen, Peter Bøgh, 214

Animal adoption, 41

Animateurs, 100

Anthropocentric interfaces, 204

Antonelli, Paola, 190

Anxiety, 104

Apollo, 140

Baller, Jim, 88

Appointments, 46–47

Baltic Rim, 80

Architecture, 76–77, 165

Bandwidth, 4, 89

AI security and, 201

Barba, Eugenio, 225

flow and, 105–109

Barter, 125–128

liquid, 192

Batty, David, 120–121

mediascapes and, 89

Baumgart, Michael, 26

networks and, 80–83

BBC, 221–222, 272n45

ontological alienation and, 100–111

Beard, George, 35–36, 236n29

relationships and, 97–100

Be´be´ar, Claude, 78

smart, 191–192

Beethoven, Ludwig von, 49

sound and, 182

Behrens, Peter, 199

theater and, 78–80

Belly dancing, 49

Aristotle, 172, 216

Benkler, Yochai, 130, 223

Arnhem Central, 108

Benthem, Jan, 97, 108–109

Art, 97, 107, 136, 164–165

Bentley, Tom, 143, 215

avant garde, 181–182

Benyus, Janine, 73–74, 187–188, 190

locality and, 76–77, 83

Bergson, Henri, 38, 103, 251n8

media, 181–184

Bhutan, 88

wetware and, 202

Biking, 72

ArtþCom, 164

BioLogic, 45–46

Arteries, 194

Bio-mechatronics, 201–203

Artificial intelligence, 201

Biomimetics, 187–199, 270n1

Artificial skin, 201, 275n46

Biomimicry (Benyus), 190

Arzoon, 169

Biotechnology, 3, 228n8

Asheron’s Call, 151

Birds, 194

‘‘Asian brown cloud,’’ 10

Black Rock Forest project, 166

Audio-Vision (Chion), 176–177

Blogs, 81

Australia, 39

Blogservatories, 166–167

Austria, 15

Bloomberg, Michael, 176

Automated teller machines (ATMs), 83, 198

Bluetooth technology, 47

Boating, 72

Automobiles, 3, 5, 52, 86–87, 187, 228n7

BodyMedia, 21

BoloBolo (P.M.), 8, 34, 228n16

car-sharing and, 19, 24, 241n14

Bombay Lunch Delivery, 40

code-sharing tickets and, 57–58

Bonami, Franco, 76

electronics in, 198

Borg drift, 116, 201–202

environmental issues and, 53–54

Bornholm Rooster, 93

GPS and, 24

Bourdieu, Pierre, 35

logistics and, 55–56

Bouthillier, Larry, 141

time costs of, 53–54

Brand, Stewart, 48

tramways and, 39

Britain, 17, 35, 41

Chalmers, Matthew, 170

Chatwin, Bruce, 29

British Airports Authority, 233n30   
British Airways, 104   
British Medical Journal, 117   
British Telecom, 154, 215   
Brittle stars, 194   
Britton, Eric, 124   
Broadband, 4   
Brook, Peter, 79   
Bryant Park, 87   
Buber, Martin, 132, 180   
Building Jerusalem (Hunt), 35   
Burdick, Joel W., 202   
Burning Man Festival, 94   
Business. See Industry   
Byron, George Gordon, 35

Chermayeff, Serge, 81

Chief information officers (CIOs), 57

China, 40

Chion, Michel, 176–177, 267n50

Choronomic influence, 73–74

Choupal sanchalak, 90

Chronos, 33

Chronotherapy, 34–35

Cisco, 155

Citta Slow, 41

City of God (St. Augustine), 170

Clark, Jim, 31, 38–39

CLIFF, 116

Climate Protection Partnership (CLiPP),

Cage, John, 182

52

Cahn, Edgar, 126

Climate tickets, 52

California Institute of Technology, 202

Clock-face pulse timetabling, 58

Calvino, Italo, 26–27

Clocks, 33–38

Cambridge University, 136

Cloning, 166

Canada, 12–13, 58

Closedloop Solutions, 169

Canto Ostinato, 211–212

COBRA, 181

Carbon dioxide, 15, 20, 22, 53, 178, 240n4

Coca-Cola, 67

Code-sharing tickets, 57–58

Cardiovascular disease (CVD), 114, 253n4

Cognition technologies, 204

Cohen, Tal, 278nn66, 68

Carlyle, Thomas, 35

Cohousing, 19

Carroll, John, 8–9, 212–214, 225, 279nn3, 8, 9

Coleman, Roger, 85–86

Collaborative mapping, 83–84

Casella Stanger, 240n3

Cassirer, Ernst, 103

Collagen, 194

Castells, Manuel, 99, 212

Colocation 2002: A Telegeography Guide to Power and Space, 69

Center for Aging Service Technologies (CAST), 123

Columbia University, 138–139

Comedia, 75

Center for Neuromorphic Systems Engineering, 202

Commons-based peer production, 130

Centre for Knowledge Societies, 91

Communication, 222. See also Information technology

Centre for Physical Electronics, 203

ambient intelligence and, 204–209

Ceppi, Giulio, 147

customer satisfaction and, 207–209

Ceramics, 188, 190, 195

face-to-face, 180–183

Chain approach, 58

The Oxford Muse and, 180–181

Communication (cont.)

superficial, 180–181

viruses and, 93

telepresence and, 60–67

wearable, 4, 21, 37, 116, 198, 203

Communication analysts, 77

Connected appliances, 4

Compact discs (CDs), 11

Connected clothing, 237n35

Complexity, 22–23

Connected Community, 85

control and, 214

CONQUEST, 115

decentralization and, 117–121

Consilience (Wilson), 30

Constructivists, 181

design frameworks and, 213–226

Duck Syndrome and, 195

Consumption. See Environmental issues; Materials

edge effect and, 216–218

Context

information and, 162–164, 167–168

advertising and, 73–75

life cycle assessment and, 230–231n16

art and, 76

locality and, 74

business models and, 224–225

manufacturing and, 188

choronomic influence and, 73–74

ontological alienation and, 100–111

collaborative design and, 220–224

patient issues and, 273n49

Prigogine and, 38

complexity and, 74

consequences and, 214–216

smartness and, 195–196

control and, 225–226

time scales and, 32–49

design frameworks and, 213–226

Composites, 190

design-free zones and, 94–95

Computer-aided design (CAD), 82

edge effect and, 216–218

Computer Music Center, 174

face-to-face, 180

Computing, 5, 165, 191

iconic architecture and, 76–77

AmI and, 204–206

distributed, 68–70

importance of, 74

learning and, 136–137

ecological footprint of, 10–11

literacy and, 162–164

embedded systems and, 197–206

live performance and, 78–80

Fluid Time project and, 46–47

mediascapes and, 83–96

human superiority and, 206–208

networks and, 80–83 (see also

increase of, 198–199

Networks)

light-speed crisis and, 68–69

new domesticity and, 45–46

materials use of, 10–11

place development and, 74–75

pervasive, 205–206

sense and respond, 213–214

proactive, 205

shopping and, 76

psychosocial, 205

simplicity and, 74

response times and, 199

social fiction and, 219–220 (see also

schools and, 139–140, 262n41

Social issues)

speech interfaces and, 172–177

spectacle and, 75–80

speed and, 43–44

territorial capital and, 79–80

storewidth paradigm and, 68–69

tourism and, 76–77

telepresence and, 60–67

ubiquitous, 173–177, 204

Control, 1, 5, 214

context and, 225–226

speed design and, 43–44

Datamitt, 177

time scales and, 32–49

Davis, Mike, 201

Conviviality

Death, 133–134

commons-based peer production and, 130

Debord, Guy, 77

Decaux, J. C., 83

communities of practice and, 131–133

Decentralization, 71

decentralization and, 130–131

Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, 130

health issues and, 113–114 (see also Health issues)

Delta Works, 220–221

Demand-responsive systems, 6–7

LETS and, 125–128

Dematerialization. See Materials

networks and, 130–133

den Doolaard, A., 221

services and, 125–129

Denmark, 15, 40

Cooper, Alan, 224–225

Depression, 104, 114

Corporate universities, 141–143

Design

Cottage Baker, 19

ambient intelligence and, 204–209

Cottam,Hilary,121,221,255n26,281n29

Creative class, 77–78 architectural, 76–83 (see also Architecture)

CrossWorlds, 169

big effects of small actions, 14–15

Crouwel, Mels, 97, 108–109

bio-mechatronics and, 201–203

Culture. See also Music; Social issues

biomimetics and, 187–199

art and, 76–77

blame and, 7

evolution and, 30–31

business models and, 224–225

live performance and, 78–80

CAD, 82

networks and, 80–83

spectacle and, 75–77 cities and, 73–76 (see also Urban planning)

speed and, 29–49

collaborative, 220–224

territorial capital and, 79–80

context and, 73–96

Customer relationship management (CRM), 36

control and, 5, 214, 225–226

edge effect and, 216–218

Cuttlefish, 192

Cyberspace. See Internet embedded systems and, 197–206, 273n31

‘‘Cyborg Manifesto’’ (Haraway), 116, 201, 254n13

end-of-pipe approach and, 24

Cyrano Sciences, 66 environmental impact and, 1, 13–17 (see also Environmental issues)

experience and, 78

Dabbawallah, 40–41

feature drift and, 186–187

Dada artists, 181

flow and, 105–109, 211–226

Daimler-Chrysler, 56

Dashboards, 167–170 form-follows-function approach and, 196

Databases, 36–37, 69, 82, 86, 90, 221–222

frameworks for, 213–226

future and, 2

Data Harvester, 166

Hannover Principles and, 25–26

Data-mining, 5

health issues and, 121–123

Design (cont.)

Digital Economy, The (Tapscott), 36

humanity and, 1

Digital graffiti, 84–85

iconic and, 76–77

Digital ID industry, 200–201

increased material burden and, 9–27

industrial age and, 2–3

Digital Library for Earth Systems Education (DLESE), 166

law of locality and, 70–71

Digital memory, 85

learning and, 135–137, 143–156

Digital photography, 20

light-speed crisis and, 68–69

Digital playgrounds, 66

light structures and, 191–196

Digitization, 36–37

marketing and, 73–77

faster-to-closer approach and, 67–70

material/process integration and, 189– 193

telepresence and, 60–67

DILEMMA, 115

mobility and, 51–72

nature and, 187–196, 272n17

Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), 13, 231n18

office, 97–98, 100

Disease. See Health issues

ontological alienation and, 100–111

DistantOne experiment, 65

originality and, 217–218

Dolce farniente, 35

perspective for, 6

Donath, Judith, 66–67

plug-and-play approach and, 218

Doors of Perception conference, 22, 61,

predict-and-provide policy and, 51–57

preferred situations and, 1–2

Dot-com era, 42

product systems and, 19–21

Douglas, Michael, 39

rebound effects of, 4–5

Downshifting, 41–42

reverse-engineering and, 43–44

Downsizing, 124, 207

rhythm and, 44–45

Doyle, Linda, 89

services and, 6–8, 16–21

Doz, Yves, 218

simplicity and, 195–196

Drucker, Peter, 77, 215

spectacle and, 75–77

speed and, 29–49

Dublin Ad Hoc Wireless Network (DAWN), 89, 249n46

storewidth paradigm and, 68–69

Dubois, Rene´, 117

sustainability and, 17–18

Duck Syndrome, 195

systems-based, 100–111

Duguid, Paul, 141, 145–147

time planning and, 54

Dunbar, Robin, 128–129

top-down, 216–218

Dunne, Tony, 63–64, 66

transparency and, 104

Dupuy, Jean-Pierre, 117

vision and, 82

Dure´e, 38

Design for the Real World (Papanek), 7

Durkheim, Emil, 114

Design-free zones, 94–95

Dutch dikes, 221

Deutsche Post World Net (DPWN), 56– 57

Dynamic resource allocation, 44

Dyson, Esther, 43, 154–155

Digiscents, 179

Digital crowds, 85

Ecological footprints, 10–11, 215

DigitalEarth.org, 81

Canadian study of, 12–13

dashboards and, 169

telepresence and, 60–67

German study of, 12

time scales and, 33–49

Kathalys and, 15–16

trust and, 42

MET matrix and, 13–14

U.S. standard of living and, 33–34

photographic film and, 20

Economist, The, 36, 76, 207

PRe´ group and, 13

Eco-tourism, 39, 237n41

weighting and, 13–14

Edge effect, 216–218

Ecological rucksack, 12

Edutainment, 144

Eco-nets, 42

Efficiency, 11–12

Economic issues, 10

commuting and, 54–55, 60

advertising and, 73–75

delivery services and, 57–60

airports and, 101–103

downshifting and, 42

business models and, 55, 224–225

logistics and, 55–57

context and, 73–74

materials and, 187–196

customer satisfaction and, 207–209

mobility and, 51–72

dot-com era and, 42

phitodepuration and, 45–46

flow and, 212

Eisermann, Richard, 45

GDP measurement and, 52, 55, 92, 96, 113, 137

Elastin, 194

Electricity, 3, 199

growth of, 30

Electronic Arts, 151

Hansa League and, 80

health issues and, 113, 121 (see also Health issues)

Electronic performance support system (EPSS), 37

Elliman, Paul, 176, 268n48

homeland security and, 200

Elliot, David, 77

human capital and, 79–80

E-mail, 5, 37, 131, 162

knowledge workers and, 77–78

learning and, 136, 140–141

learning and, 137–143

telepresence and, 60–67

LETS and, 125–128

End-of-pipe approach, 24

logistics and, 55–60

Energy, 8, 233n28

mediascapes and, 83–96

art and, 181–182

mobility and, 52–57

automobiles and, 53–54

networks and, 80–83

buildings and, 192

Olympics and, 78

computer manufacturing and, 10–11

open source and, 222–223

end-of-pipe approach and, 24

part-time work and, 38, 41–42

factor 20 and, 23

patient issues and, 273n49

high-speed trains and, 53

physical assets and, 98–99

increased material burden and, 9–27

place marketing and, 74–77

industrial pollution and, 12–17

real time and, 36–38

information technology and, 10–12

regional economic architecture and, 80

Kathalys and, 15–16

self-service economy and, 219–220

nature and, 196–197

shopping and, 76

telepresence and, 60–67

slow movements and, 41–42

TNS Framework and, 16–17

Energy (cont.)

transportation systems and, 52

tripled production of, 9–10

Eno, Brian, 175

Enterprise resource management (ERM), 36

Environmental issues, 1, 3, 7, 113

air traffic and, 52–53

automobiles and, 53–54

climate tickets and, 52

cloned trees, 166

context and, 74

DALYs assessment and, 13

eco-guilt, 23

ecological footprints and, 10–11 (see also Ecological footprints)

ELIMA and, 13

forest instrumentation and, 166

fossil fuel use and, 31–32

garden effect and, 46

global warming, 2, 10, 228–229n1

Hannover Principles and, 25–26

high-speed trains and, 39–40, 53

impact assessment and, 13–15

increased material burden and, 9–27

industrial pollution, 12–17

information and, 164–165

invisibility of, 21–24

land use, 13

mobility and, 52, 71–72

noise pollution, 175–176

phitodepuration and, 45–46

population explosion and, 5, 9–10

Tipping Points and, 74

TNS Framework and, 16–17

toxic chemicals, 10–11, 13, 165– 166

T-Vision and, 164–165

waste and, 12–13, 161–162

weather, 10

weighting and, 13–14

Environmental Life Cycle Information   
Management and Acquisition   
(ELIMA), 13, 231n19   
eRENA project, 65   
ESTEEM, 115   
Estonia, 80   
Eternally Yours, 14, 231n21   
Ethernets, 11   
Ethics, 7   
European Commission, 11, 124, 227n5   
European Design for Aging Network, 122   
European Union, 15, 55, 79–80   
Evaluators, 82   
Everard, Christopher, 76   
Everquest, 151   
Evolvers, 82   
Exabytes, 164   
Experience designers, 78   
Exp exhibition, 78   
Extended homes, 19

Factor 20, 23

Fakespace systems, 66

Fantasy, 151

Faraway project, 64–65

Fathom, 138–139, 259n15

Feature drift, 29, 186–187

FedEx, 37, 56, 84

Ferna´ndez-Galiano, Luis, 171, 271n11

Fibers, 190, 194, 197

Findeli, Alain, 213

Fire and Memory (Ferna´ndez-Galiano), 171, 271n11

FirstDirect, 218

Five Capitals Model, 16

Flores, Fernando, 172–173

Florida, Richard, 77

Flow, 92, 111, 165, 211. See also

airports and, 100–103, 106–107

business models and, 224–225

collaborative design and, 220–224

consequences and, 214–216

control and, 225–226

Germany, 12, 15

designing space for, 97–98, 100, 105– 109, 212–213

automobiles and, 53–54

high-speed trains and, 53

economic issues and, 212

telepresence and, 61

edge effect and, 216–218

Gilder, George, 11, 68, 69–70

mediascapes and, 83–96

Gislason, Halldor, 94

movement studies and, 108–109

Gladwell, Malcolm, 74, 215

office design and, 97–98, 100

Glasgow University, 170

rhythm and, 44–45, 48–49, 173–177

sense and respond, 213–214

Global Positioning System (GPS), 24, 83–84, 90, 93, 242n26

social fiction and, 219–220

time scales and, 46–47

Global Supply Chain Management Forum, 57

Fluid Time project, 46–48

Global warming, 2, 10, 229n1

Fluxus, 182

Gobert, Danielle, 37

Food, 40, 58–59

Godard, Jean-Luc, 156

Ford Motors, 56

Goetz, Thomas, 222

Forrester research, 207

Forum for the Future, 17

Goldberg, Ken, 171–172, 177, 266– 267n33

Fossil fuels, 13, 229n4

Gombrich, Ernst, 174–175

Fox, Kate, 178

Gomes, Lee, 42

France, 40

Frauenhofer-Gesellshaft, 61

Goonatilake, Susantha, 217, 280nn16– 18

Fujihata, Masaki, 182–183

Government

homeland security and, 200

Gage, John, 165

information and, 164

Games, 151, 156–157, 214, 222

GammaMaster, 165 learning and, 135–136, 140–141, 151, 154

Garden effect, 46

Graham, Stephen, 74, 246n14

Gardner, Howard, 136–137, 150, 259n6

Graham, Tony, 78

Gates, Bill, 209

Gray, John, 63

Gavaghan, Kevin, 218

Grose, Thomas, 202

Gaver, Bill, 173–177, 179

Geiger counter, 165, 175

Gross domestic product (GDP), 52, 55, 92, 96, 113, 137

Gell-Mann, Murray, 99, 218

Growth Fetish (Hamilton), 24

General Electric, 37, 168

Grutzen, Paul, 229n2

General Motors, 198

Guardian, 23, 120

Geographical information systems (GIS), 82

Hacker Ethic, The (Himanen), 159

Geography of Time, A (Levine), 34, 177– 178

Hamilton, Clive, 23–24

Hampden-Turner, Charles, 141, 148

Geo-marking, 84

Han, Yosh, 167

Geomatics, 5, 82

Handan Organic Vegetables, 40

George, Susan, 31

Hannover Principles, 25–26

Hansa League, 80

Heathrow Airport, 52, 102

Hanze Expo, 80

Heden, Flemming, 20

‘‘Happiness: A Survival Guide for Art and Life’’ (MAM show), 77

Hen adoption, 41

Haraway, Donna, 116, 201, 254n13

Henderson, Hazel, 118, 143

Herz, J. C., 151, 157–158

Hard assets, 79–81

Hewlett-Packard, 86, 215

Hargreaves, David, 136, 143

High Speed Network Platform, 40

Harvard University, 136, 141

Hatch, T., 136, 259n6

High-speed trains (HSTs), 31, 39–40, 53, 58

Hawken, Paul, 11–12, 16, 23

Hillis, Danny, 164

HazMat Smart Strip, 165–166

Hillman, Mayer, 54

Head-mounted displays, 66

Hilton Hotels, 38

Health: Co-creating Services (Cottam and Leadbeater), 121

Himanen, Pekka, 159

Hippocrates, 131, 214–215

Health issues, 3, 31, 94

Hirsch, Jesse, 222–223

aging and, 121–122

Hoch, Dee W., 30

bio-mechatronics and, 201–203

Holidays, 34

cardiovascular disease and, 114, 253n4

care crisis and, 113

Holland, 13–16, 40, 58, 76, 81–82, 220– 221

convivial work and, 125–129

Holzer, Jenny, 107

costs of, 113–116, 253n3

Homeland security (HS) technology, 200

DALYs assessment and, 13

HomeTech, 45

death and, 133–134

Hong Kong, 19

decentralization of services and, 117– 121

Hospitals. See Health issues

ELIMA and, 13

Hosting, 76, 78

HUMAN, 116

government and, 114, 121–122

Human capital, 8

information technology and, 115–121

ambient intelligence and, 204–209

jet lag, 34

bartering and, 125–128

mental health and, 120–121

bio-mechatronics and, 201–203

nature and, 217

networks and, 124–125

borg drift and, 116, 201–202

communication and, 172–177

neurasthenia, 35–36

communities of practice and, 131–133

obesity, 72, 244–245n55

commuting and, 54–55, 60

quality time and, 37–42

conviviality and, 113–134

self-care and, 117

customer satisfaction and, 207–209

sensory stimulation and, 34–35

downsizing and, 124, 207

slow movements and, 38–41

embodied knowledge and, 109–111

suicide and, 114

technology and, 115–117 face-to-face communication and, 180– 183

time scales and, 32–49

unbundling and, 124–125

greater intelligence of, 206–208

wearable computers and, 21

health issues and, 117–121 (see also

Heart experiment, 65

Health issues)

information market and, 124

job quality and, 124–125

corporate universities and, 141–143

kairological time and, 33

cultural, 76–78

learning and, 135–159

customer satisfaction and, 207–209 (see

literacy and, 161–184

also Economic issues)

mediascapes and, 83–86

data caches and, 69

multiple intelligence and, 136

delivery services and, 57–60

networks and, 80–86, 124–125

digital ID, 200–201

office design and, 97–98, 100

downsizing and, 124, 207

playtime and, 156–158

educational, 137–138, 141–143

quality time and, 37–42

experience and, 78

relationships and, 97–100

Fluid Time and, 46–47

sensory stimulation and, 34–35, 170– 172

fossil fuel use of, 31–32

health care, 115–116, 124

slow movements and, 38–41

impact assessment and, 13–15

smell and, 177–180

inefficiency and, 11–12

soft assets and, 79–81

information age and, 10

sound and, 173–177

job quality and, 124–125

spectacle and, 75–80

knowledge workers and, 77–78

telepresence and, 60–67

locality and, 73

theater and, 78–80

logistics and, 55–57

time scales and, 32–49

manufacturing complexity and, 188

trust and, 42

virtual communication and, 62–67 material/process integration and, 189– 193

walking and, 72

mediascapes and, 89–96

Human Interface Technology Laboratory, 65

military and, 163–166, 189, 254n12

music and, 48–49

HungryMinds, 138

Olympics and, 78

Hunt, Tristram, 35–36

OTO and, 56

patient issues and, 275n50

Iannucci, Armando, 180

place marketing and, 74–77

IBM, 104, 154, 172, 174, 202, 215, 224

pollution and, 12–17 (see also

IDC, 229n5

Environmental issues)

Illich, Ivan, 44–45, 54, 75–76, 116–117, 135–136, 170, 180

predict-and-provide policy and, 51–57

real time business and, 36–38, 169

Imagineers, 3, 100

research factories and, 188–189

India, 40, 52–53, 90–91

response times and, 199

Industry, 2–3, 21–22, 245n3

self-service economy and, 219–220

advertising and, 73–75, 161–162

slow movements and, 41–42

big effects of small actions, 14–15

speed and, 45–46

business models and, 55, 224–225

sustainability and, 16–18

carrying capacity of, 29

systems-based design and, 100–111

clock and, 32–33

telepresence and, 60–67

computer manufacturing and, 10–11

time scales and, 32–49, 57–60

context and, 73–74

tourism, 39, 76–77

Industry (cont.)

cost and, 90, 149–150

transportation and, 55

dashboards and, 167–170

trust and, 42

data collection and, 36–37

warehousing and, 57

ecological footprint of, 10–12

waste from, 12

energy use and, 10–12

Information, 10. See also Learning

before-and-after knowledge maps and, 168

Fluid Time and, 46–47

health issues and, 115–121

LETS and, 125–128

communication and, 172–177

learning and, 141, 149–150

complexity and, 162–164, 167–168

literacy and, 161–184

context and, 162–164

materials and, 10–11

distraction and, 162–163

mediascapes and, 83–96

ecological, 166–167

overload and, 162–164

face-to-face communication and, 180– 183

paper use and, 11

proximity applications and, 86–87

government and, 164

speed and, 36–38

interpretation issues and, 167

spreadsheets and, 168–169

knowledge at a distance and, 171–172

SRDZs and, 82–83

Library of Congress and, 163–164

telepresence and, 60–67

military and, 163–166

time scales and, 32–49

olfactory, 177–180

wireless graffiti and, 84

overload of, 162–164

Inhabited Information Spaces, 85

physical interaction and, 167–168

Innovation, 99–100, 218. See also Design

sensual, 170–177

as adjustment, 215

smart skin and, 193–194

agenda for, 4

sound research and, 173–177

consequences and, 3

spreadsheets and, 168, 169

design-free zones and, 94–95

stimulation and, 180

feature drift and, 29, 186–187

tactile, 177

open source, 222

T-Vision and, 164–165

rebound effects of, 4–5

visual, 170–177

slow movements and, 44–45

waste and, 161–162

Information Societies Technology program, 219

Instant messaging, 131

Insurance companies, 114

Intellectual value, 43

Information Society Technologies Advisory Group (ISTAG), 204, 209

Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, 47, 64–65, 83

Information technology, 15–16

advertising and, 73–75, 161–162

Interactive voice recognition (IVR), 207– 208

always-on mode and, 37–38

Interface, 224

asset management and, 98–99

International Data Corporation, 149

Bhutan and, 88

Internet, 158

clutter problem of, 161–162

complexity theory and, 38

Bhutan and, 88

bio-mechatronics and, 202–203

context and, 162–164

colocation and, 69

cost and, 90 digital graffiti and, 84 distance learning and, 140–141 economic issues and, 52–57 energy use of, 11 health issues and, 115–121 law of locality and, 70–71   
LETS and, 126, 128   
load balancing and, 69 LSPs and, 90–91 Olympics and, 78 online ticketing and, 207–208   
promises and, 9   
real time and, 36–38 road traffic increase and, 61   
speed and, 42   
telepresence and, 60–67 timetables and, 57–60 visual information and, 171–172 wearable computers and, 21   
Irie, Keiici, 182   
Irwin, Robert, 182   
Ishii, Hiroshi, 62   
Israel, 48   
Italy, 35, 41, 46–47   
ITC, 90   
Ithaca Hours, 128

Jameson, David, 174   
Japan, 43, 76, 144–145   
Java, 153   
Jay, Martin, 170   
Jazz, 48   
Je´gou, Franc¸ois, 19   
Jeremijenko, Natalie, 166–167, 183   
Jet lag, 34   
Jhunjhunwaller, Ashok, 91   
Johnston, Peter, 227n5   
Joint loading, 59   
Juice Software, 169   
Kabyle people, 35   
Kac, Eduardo, 184, 269n67   
Kahn, Herman, 227n4   
Kahn, Louis, 86   
Kairos, 33   
Kastens, Kim, 166   
Kathalys, 15–16   
Kaye, Joseph, 179   
Kelantese people, 35   
Kemp, Martin, 194–195   
Kennedy, Margrit, 127   
Kevlar, 188   
Kieslinger, Michael, 47   
KISS, 115   
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, 58   
Knowledge workers, 77–78   
Kolkota, 39   
Kontiki, 69   
Koolhaas, Rem, 106–107   
Kotler, Philip, 74–75   
Krebs, Valdis, 131   
Kroker, Arthur, 203   
Kunzru, Harry, 219   
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory,   
166   
Landry, Charles, 75   
Landsat, 164   
Land use, 13   
La Transhumance, 51   
La vie associative (city-webs), 80–83,   
132   
Law of diminishing amazement (LODA),   
187   
Law of locality, 70–71   
Leadbeater, Charles, 49, 121, 221,   
255n26, 281n29   
Learning, 166, 277n63   
applied skills and, 137   
assessment of, 150–151   
collaborative, 152–154   
communities of practice and, 153–154   
context and, 136–137   
copying and, 196–197   
corporate universities and, 141–143   
design for, 135–137, 143–156   
distance learning and, 139–141

Learning (cont.)

economic issues and, 137–143

e-mail and, 136

government and, 135–136, 140–141, 151, 154

instant knowledge and, 145

meaning and, 148–149

mentors and, 151–152

mobile phones and, 144–145

multiple intelligence and, 136

networks and, 149–150

new geographies of, 158–159

overload and, 142–143

physical interaction and, 167–168

playtime and, 156–158

search skills and, 150

smartness and, 196–197

space and, 146–148

spending on, 137–138, 149, 154–155

teachers and, 135–136, 154

thinking and, 143

Learning Beyond the Classroom (Bentley), 143

Leasing, 18

Leaves, 194

Liberty, 205

Le Campanier, 40

Library of Congress, 163–164

Life cycle assessment (LCA), 230– 231n16

Lee, Hau, 57

Lightness ecological footprints and, 10–16, 20 industry and, 21–22, 108 social burden of materials and, 9–27

Legal issues, 5

Lerup, Lars, 89

Lewis, Ted, 198

Livermore National Laboratories, 193

Local Futures, 79–80, 247n16

Light on the Net (Fujihata), 183

Livingstone, Sonia, 156

Locality, 129. See also Context

Live|Work, 220

Local exchange and trading systems (LETS), 125–128

Legible City (Shaw), 182

Light-speed crisis, 68–69

Lettrists, 181

Linden, Greger, 205

Lessig, Lawrence, 223

Liquid architecture, 192

Living Memory, 84

globalization and, 153

Literacy. See also Information

Live performance, 78–80, 83

Load balancing, 69

face-to-face communication and, 180– 183

Levine, Robert, 33–35, 48, 177–178

future, 183–184

manuals and, 163–164

law of, 70–71

network services and, 244n50

overload and, 162–164

rural, 89–91

scientific publishing and, 163–164

Local service partners (LSPs), 90–91

Logistics, 55–56, 74, 200, 224

delivery services and, 57–60

health issues and, 117–121

timetables and, 57–60

Loitering, 35

Lomborg, Bjorn, 167

London School of Economics, 99, 131, 139

Long Now Foundation, 48

Lovins, Amory, 11–12, 16, 23, 232– 233n27

Lovins, L. Hunter, 11–12, 16, 23, 232– 233n27

Løvlie, Lavrans, 220, 280n25

Lowry, Glenn, 77

Maas, Winy, 82

McCullough, Malcolm, 83, 111

McDonald’s, 92

hidden history of, 12

McDonough, William, 25–26

high-speed trains and, 53

Maghreb Region, 55

increased social burden of, 9–27

Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 203, 276n56

industrial waste and, 12

inefficiency and, 11–12

Malaysia, 35

information technology and, 10–11

Manifesta, 76

Kathalys and, 15–16

Manzini, Ezio, 6, 19, 23, 41, 190, 219

land use and, 13

Map for Bikes and Birds, 167

leasing and, 18

lightness and, 191–196

before-and-after knowledge maps and, 168

MET matrix and, 13–14

nature and, 187–196, 272n17

collaborative, 83–84

paper use and, 11

learning and, 132, 145–146

process integration and, 189–193

locality and, 82–84, 89, 93

properties of, 190, 192

Marckmann, Frits, 207

recycling and, 14

Marinetti, F. G., 174, 267n43

silk, 188

Marketing, 161–162

telepresence and, 60–67

context and, 73–75

TNS Framework and, 16–17

knowledge workers and, 77–78

transportation systems and, 52

place development and, 74–75

weighting and, 13–14

Markle Foundation, 256n32

Matsushita, 2

Mars mission, 221

Mau, Bruce, 168

Martin Luther University, 53

Maxmin, James, 129–130

Marvin, Simon, 74

Mayon-White, Bill, 99

Material input per service unit (MIPS), 53

Meal porters, 40

Meaning, 98, 109–111, 148–149

Material of Invention, The (Manzini), 190

Mediascapes, 83–86

Materials, 8, 187

communities of practice and, 131– 133

aerogels, 193

cost and, 88, 90

air transport and, 52–53

design-free zones and, 94–95

automobiles and, 53–54

development alternatives and, 89–91

ceramics, 188, 190, 195

downside of, 92–94

composites, 190

infrastructure and, 87–89

computer manufacturing and, 10–11

learning and, 139–141

end-of-pipe approach and, 24

literacy and, 181–184

factor 20 and, 23

proximity applications and, 86–87

fibers, 190, 194, 197

resource ecologies and, 86–87

flow of, 9–12

service ecologies and, 91–92

form-follows-function approach and, 196

T-Vision and, 164

wireless graffiti and, 84–85

growing economy and, 10

Medical Nemesis (Illich), 116–117

Mentors, 151–152

time literacy and, 48–49, 54

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 170–171

urban sprawl and, 54–55

MET matrix, 13–14

virtual communication and, 62–67

Metronome, 49

walking and, 72

Microsoft, 151, 161, 172, 200

Moore, Andrew, 119–120

Military, 163–166, 189, 254n12

Morace, Francesco, 45–46

Mitleton-Kelly, Eve, 131

Mori, Yoshiko, 76–77

MIT Media Lab, 60–62, 66–67, 179

Mori Art Museum (MAM), 77

Miyake, Riiche, 182

Movable Realities (Irie), 182

Mobile Bristol, 89

Mumford, Lewis, 32

Mobile phones, 9, 18, 37, 83, 158   
learning and, 144–145   
ticket purchasing and, 207

MuniWireless.com, 88

Murdoch, George P., 133–134

Muse Conversation Menu, 181

Mobility, 30–31, 218

Muse Hotel, 152

air traffic and, 52–53

Music, 79, 172, 181

automobiles and, 53–54

flow and, 211–212

biking and, 72

jazz, 48

chain approach and, 58

metronome and, 49

clock-face pulse timetabling and, 58

sound research and, 174–175

code-sharing tickets and, 57–58

ragtime, 48

commuting and, 54–55, 60

Music for Airports (Eno), 175

cost of, 52, 71–72, 239n1

Mussels, 188

delivery services and, 57–60

MVRDV, 81–83

faster-to-closer approach and, 67–70

Fluid Time project and, 46–47

Napster, 69–71

high-speed trains and, 53

NASDAQ, 2

importance of, 52–57

law of locality and, 70–71

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 53, 164, 221

logistics and, 55–57

measurement of, 60

National Association of Allotment and Leisure Gardeners, 41

ontological alienation and, 100–111

National Health Service (U.K.), 121

package delivery services and, 56–57

Natural capital, 232n26

peer-to-peer decentralization and, 71

predict-and-provide policy and, 51–57

Natural Capitalism (Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins), 11–12, 16, 23, 25

psychology of, 100–111

quality of life and, 51

railroad and, 32, 52

slow travel and, 38–39

speed and, 38–39, 242n24

substitution and, 51–52, 60–62

Natural systems, 217   
biomimetics and, 187–199   
design in, 187–196, 272n17   
energy and, 196–197   
speed and, 31–32

sustainability and, 51

Natural time, 103–104

telepresence and, 60–67

Nature Ride, 19

think-more-drive-less approach, 57–60

Negroponte, Nicholas, 60–61

Neighbourhood Gardener, 222

Nemawashi, 43

Office clowns, 100

Netherlands Design Institute, 97–98, 271–272n15

Office design, 97–98, 100

Olfactory interfaces, 177–180

Netonomy, 207

Olympics, 78

Netscape, 31, 38

OneTree project, 166

Networks, 42, 69, 111, 215–216

Ongee people, 177–178

ambient intelligence and, 204–209

Only to order (OTO), 56

collapses of, 92–94

OpenCourseWare, 139

conviviality and, 130–133

decentralization and, 71

Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), 264–265n9

embedded technologies and, 197–206, 273n32

Open Source Development Network, 222

health issues and, 118–124

Orange, 220

law of locality and, 70–71

Organic produce, 40

learning, 143–144, 149–150, 156–157

OroOro, 153–154

mediascapes and, 83–96

Ota, Kayoko, 43

open source, 222

Oticon, 201

spatial planning and, 80–83

Overall, Robyn, 196

telepresence and, 60–67

Ownership, 6–7, 18–21

Neurasthenia, 35–36

Oxford Muse, The, 180–181, 228n10

Neuromag, 203, 274n55

Oxford University, 152

Nevejan, Caroline, 136, 145–146, 153, 259n3

Pacione, Chris, 20–21

New domesticity, 45–46

New York City Council, 88

Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 191– 192, 270n8

New York Museum of Modern Art, 77, 98, 190

Papanek, Victor, 1–2, 7

Paper, 11

New York Public Library, 139

Papert, Seymour, 139–140

New York University, 87, 223

Paradigm Shift (Tapscott), 36

New York Wireless, 87

Patients, 275n50

Noise pollution, 175–176

Pea roots, 196

Nokia, 37, 87

Peer-to-peer decentralization, 71

Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 90

Penguins, 185–186, 192, 271n14

Personal area networks (PANs), 203

Norretranders, Tor, 62–63

Personal digital assistants (PDAs), 37

Norway, 59

Pervasive Computing, 205

NOX, 192

NS International, 207–208

Pharmaceutical companies, 114, 202– 203

Oakley, Ann, 125

Phenomenology of Perception, The (Merleau-Ponty), 170

Obesity, 72, 244–245n55

Phitodepuration, 45–46

Odin, 40

Phonographs, 26

Odin Theatre, 225

Pirkl, James, 122

Pitroda, Sam, 91, 249n51

computing and, 205

Plain old telephone service (POTS), 63

health issues and, 114

Planetary Work Machine, 34

space and, 100–111

Plans and Situated Actions (Suchman), 105–106

speed and, 35–36

systems-driven design and, 100–109

Plastics, 190, 197

telepresence and, 60–67

Plato, 172

Psychosocial computing, 205

Playtime, 156–158

Public call offices (PCOs), 91

Plummer, Henry, 103

Public relations, 77

P.M., 34

‘‘Poetics of Light, The’’ (Plummer), 103

Quality time, 37–42

Poetics of Telepresence, The, 63–64

Polar bears, 192, 271n14

Raby, Fiona, 63–64, 66

Policy Studies Institute, 54

Radio, 158, 186, 222

Populate project, 62

Radio frequency (RF) tags, 56, 59

Porritt, Jonathon, 17

Ragtime, 48

Power of Now, The (Ranadive), 37

Railroads, 3, 32, 52

Power tools, 18–19, 87

code-sharing tickets and, 57–58

Prada, 76

high-speed, 31, 39–40, 53, 58

Prayer times, 33

online ticketing and, 207–208

PRe´, 13–14, 197

Ranadive, Vivek, 37

Predict-and-provide policy, 51–57

Raves, 79

PRE-HIP, 115–116

Real time, 36–37, 164–165, 191

Prigogine, Ilya, 38

business and, 169

Privacy, 3

mediascapes and, 83–96

Proactive computing, 205

quality time and, 38–42

Probe Research, 70

response times and, 199

Processor-in-memory (PIM), 70

Reason, Ben, 128

Productivity, 42. See also Speed

Recycling, 14, 25

city design and, 75–76

feature drift and, 186–187

Regional economic architecture (REA), 79–80

logistics and, 55–57

Regionmaker, The, 81–82, 94, 247n22

material/process integration and, 189– 193

Reibstein, David, 138

Reich, Robert, 77

RF tags and, 56

Reid, Jo, 89

transportation systems and, 52

Reiner, Gary, 37, 168

Product-service system, 19–21

Religion, 33

Project F, 45–46, 238n55, 238–239n56

Renaissance, 217

ProLogis, 242n24

Research facilities, 188–189

Promenade theater, 79

Response times, 199

Proxemics, 63–64

Reusable information object (RIO), 155

Psychology, 34

Reverse-engineering, 43–44

architecture and, 100–111

Rheingold, Howard, 129, 153

RhineRuhrCity project, 82

human superiority and, 206–208

Rhythm, 44–45, 48–49, 173–177

IVR, 207–208

Rice University, 89

kairological time and, 33

Rieger, Matthias, 49–50

leasing and, 18

Rifkin, Jeremy, 35, 44

logistics and, 55–60, 74

Rikkyo University, 144–145

mediascapes and, 86–87, 91–92

‘‘Rocks to Rubble,’’ 230n15

ownership and, 18–21

Roentgen, Konrad, 203

product-service system and, 19–21

Rokeby, David, 165

resource ecologies and, 86–87

Role-playing games, 151

self-service economy and, 219–220

Roppongi Hills tower, 76–77

speed and, 36–38

Roszak, Theodore, 26

sustainability and, 16–18

Royal College of Art, 85, 179

ticket purchasing and, 207

Rubin, Benjamin, 175–176

Sesame Street, 144

Rushkoff, Douglas, 156

Shahal Medical Services, 119

Russian Constructivists, 181

Sharma, Yonmoy, 203

Sharp, 173

Saarinen, Eero, 106

Shaw, Jeffrey, 182

Sachs, Wolfgang, 31–32

Shneiderman, Ben, 172

St. Augustine, 170

Shopping, 76

Saint-Exupe´ry, Antoine, 24–25

Short message system (SMS), 145, 207

St. Vincent’s Hospital, 109–111

Siegele, Ludwig, 36–37, 168

Schafer, R. Murray, 175

Silk, 188

Schiphol Airport, 105, 107–109, 252n19

Simon, Herbert, 1–2

Scho¨n, Donald, 106

Simplicity, 74

Schor, Juliet, 42

Site-specific theater, 79

Scientific Revolution, 217

Sea cucumbers, 194

Six Memos for a New Millenium (Calvino), 26–27

Sea lilies, 194

Skandia, 59

Sea urchins, 194

SeeBeyond, 169

Skeptical Environmentalist, The (Lomborg), 167

Seely Brown, John, 141, 145–147

Slashdot, 153

Seen (Rokeby), 165

Slow food, 237–238n44

Seifried, D., 54

Slow movements, 38–46

Sennett, Richard, 103

Serota, Nicholas, 77

Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), 15

Services, 6–8, 224–225

Smart Architecture, 191–192

decentralization and, 117–121, 130– 131

Smart cards, 200–201

Smart materials, 4

delivery, 37, 56–60, 84

Smart Mobs (Rheingold), 153

Fluid Time project and, 46–48

Smartness, 185

health care, 113–123 (see also Health issues)

AI security and, 201

AmI and, 204–206

Smartness (cont.)

information age and, 10

bio-mechatronics and, 201–203

intellectual value, 43

complexity and, 195–196

knowledge workers and, 77–78

copying and, 196–197

literacy and, 161–184

critical reflection and, 200–201

live performance and, 78–80

embedded systems and, 197–206

loitering and, 35

error-prone gadgets and, 197–198

Long Now Foundation and, 48

feature drift and, 186–187

marketing and, 74–75

human superiority and, 206–208

mobility, 51–72

learning and, 196–197

music, 48–49

light structures and, 191–196

nemawashi and, 42–43

manufacturing complexity and, 188

networks, 80–83

material/process integration and, 189– 193

new domesticity, 45–46

office design and, 97–98, 100

nature and, 187–199

ownership, 6–7, 18–21

research facilities and, 188–189

place development, 74–77

smart skin and, 193–194

population and, 5, 41

Smart tags, 198

quality time and, 37–42

Smart Textiles Network, 237n35

shopping and, 76

Smell, 177–180

slow movements and, 38–41

Sociable Media Group, 66–67

sociability and, 35–36

Social fiction, 219–220

social fiction and, 219–220

Social issues

spectacle and, 75–77

adaptation, 3

speed, 29–49

affluence’s emptiness, 24

sports, 78

clocks, 32–38

suicide, 114

communities of practice and, 131–133

telepresence, 60–67

context and, 73–96

territorial capital and, 79–80

conviviality and, 113–134

time literacy and, 48–49

creative class and, 77–78

trust and, 42

cultural evolution and, 30–31

urban sprawl, 5, 54–55

demand-responsive systems, 6–7

waste, 161–162

downsizing, 124, 207

economic growth and, 9–10, 113

Social Life of Information, The (Seely Brown and Duguid), 141, 145–147

edge effect, 216–218

Society of the Spectacle, The (Debord), 77

electrification, 199

Soft assets, 79–81

embedded systems, 197–206

Solomon, Debra, 40

experience and, 78

Sonic Hub, 83

factor 20 and, 23

Sontag, Susan, 170, 183

Fluid Time project and, 46–47

Sony, 151

garden effect, 46

Sounding Object, 173, 267n38

global simultaneity and, 26

Sound research, 173–177, 182

increased material burden, 9–27

Sourceforge, 222

Southwest Airlines, 56

computers and, 68–70

Soya Choupal, 90–91

cost of, 31–34, 37

Space

cultural evolution and, 30–31, 35

acousmatic, 176

design principles for, 43–44

artificial, 100–111

digitization and, 36–37

colocation and, 69

ethics and, 35

context and, 73–96

feature bloat and, 29

decentralization and, 71

Fluid Time project and, 46–47

fakespace systems and, 66

fossil fuel use and, 31–32

flow and, 212–213

informational footprint and, 30–31

learning and, 146–148

information technology and, 36–38

marketing and, 73–75

law of locality and, 70–71

meaning and, 109–111

light-speed crisis and, 68

mediascapes and, 83–86

literacy of, 498–500

networks and, 80–83

loitering and, 35

ontological alienation and, 100–111

nature and, 31–32

place development and, 74–77

nemawashi and, 42–43

regional economic architecture and, 80

priority and, 38

relationships and, 97–100

Project F and, 45–46

sound research and, 173–177

psychosis from, 34–36

spectacle and, 75–80

quality time and, 37–42

splintering urbanism and, 74

reverse-engineering and, 43–44

systems-driven design and, 100–109

rhythm and, 44–45, 48–49

telepresence and, 60–67

slow movements and, 38–45

theater and, 78–80

sociability and, 35–36

tourism and, 76–77

time literacy and, 48–49

travel and, 100–103

time scales and, 31–49

urban sprawl and, 5, 54–55

travel and, 30–32, 38–39

Space Station Freedom, 164

trust and, 42

Spark! conference, 93

Whirlpool Europe and, 45

Sparse Area Communications, 91

Spider silk, 188

Special effects, 79

Splintering urbanism, 74

Special rural development zones (SRDZs), 82–83

Spohrer, Jim, 84

Sports, 78

Spectacle, 75–80

Spreadsheets, 168–169

Speech interfaces, 172–177

Square Mile (London), 52

Speed, 99–100, 215

Stalder, Felix, 222–223

acceleration and, 29–35, 38, 43–44, 200

Stanford University, 173

Starbucks, 92

always-on and, 37–38

Starfish, 194

AmI and, 204–206

Stealth, 94–95

carrying capacity and, 29

Sterling, Bruce, 22

clocks and, 32–38

Storewidth paradigm, 68–69

Storytelling, 161, 181

Stress. See Complexity

Suchman, Lucy, 105–106, 171

Suicide, 114

Sun Microsystems, 165

Supply chain integration (SCI), 36, 56– 57

Support Economy, The (Zuboff and Maxmin), 129–130

Surrealists, 181

Sustainability. See also Environmental issues

building waste and, 192

cities and, 75–76

design and, 17–18

mobility and, 51

product-service system and, 19–21

TNS Framework and, 16–17

transportation systems and, 52

Sustainable Everyday: A Catalogue of Promising Solutions ( Je´gou and Manzini), 19

Swedish Institute of Agricultural Sciences, 58–59

Switzerland, 58

Symbolic analysts, 77–78

SysOps, 142–143, 209

Tactile information, 177   
Tapscott, Don, 36   
Tate Gallery, 77   
Taub Urban Research Center, 69, 87   
Taxi systems, 86   
Technology, 98 ambient intelligence and, 204–209 bio-mechatronics and, 201–203 clocks, 32–38   
computers, 4–5 (see also Computing) downsizing and, 207   
ecological footprint of, 10–11 embedded, 197–206, 273n32   
fakespace systems and, 66 feature drift and, 186–187

Fluid Time project and, 46–48   
GPS, 24, 83–84, 90, 93, 242n26   
health issues and, 115–117   
homeland security, 200   
human superiority and, 206–208   
information, 10–11, 172–177 (see also   
Information technology; Internet)   
learning and, 149–150 (see also   
Learning)   
light-speed crisis and, 68–69   
mass, 3   
metronome, 49   
music and, 49   
NASDAQ and, 2   
olfactory interfaces and, 177–180   
ontological alienation and, 100–111   
patient issues and, 275n50   
productivity and, 42   
promises of, 3, 9, 123–124   
rebound effects of, 4–5   
as self-perpetuating system, 2–3   
speech interfaces and, 172–177   
speed and, 29–49   
tactile interfaces and, 177   
telegraph, 3, 26, 30   
telephones and, 3 (see also Telephones)   
telepresence and, 60–67   
television, 3, 85, 158   
ubiquitous computing and, 173–177   
undersea, 65   
WLL, 90   
TedMed, 115   
Telecosm (Gilder), 11   
Telegraphs, 3, 26, 30   
Telemedicine Glossary, 115   
Telenor, 59   
Telephones, 3, 5, 26, 131   
high rise buildings and, 83   
learning and, 144–145   
mobile phones, 9, 18, 37, 83, 144–145,   
158, 207   
POTS and, 63   
productivity and, 42   
speed and, 30, 36   
ticket purchasing and, 207   
voice mail services, 19–20   
Telepistemology, 172, 177   
Teleshopping, 55   
Television, 3, 85, 158   
Telia, 20   
Temperature-sensing system, 66   
ten Holt, Simeon, 211–212   
Territorial capital, 79–83, 247n20   
Territory as interface, 85–86   
Terrorism, 93, 165, 200   
Text messaging, 145   
Teyler’s Museum, 172   
Thackara’s law, 187   
Thacker, Eugene, 3   
Theater, 78–80, 225   
The Natural Step, The (TNS) Framework,   
16–17   
The Open Planning Project (TOPP), 81   
ThinkCycle, 222   
Thinking Machine computers, 61   
Thoreau, Henry David, 33   
Three Mile Island, 174   
Tikkun, 19   
Time, 31   
acceleration and, 34–35   
clocks and, 32–38   
commuting and, 52–55, 60   
event to time, 32–36   
flexible schedules and, 261n33   
fluid, 46–47   
historical, 32–34   
industry and, 32–49   
jet lag, 34   
literacy of, 48–49   
loitering and, 35   
natural, 103–104   
nemawashi and, 42–43   
qualitative vs. quantitative, 33   
real, 36–42, 83–96, 164–165, 169, 191,   
199   
response times and, 199   
rhythm and, 44–45, 48–49, 173–177   
slow movements and, 38–45   
Time Dollars, 126–128   
Time Machine, 174   
Timetables, 57–60   
Time Wars (Rifkin), 44   
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 35   
Tollpost Globe, 59   
Toop, David, 175   
Tourism, 76–77, 237n40   
Townsend, Anthony, 70, 244n47   
Toxic chemicals, 10–11, 13, 165–166   
TPG, 56   
Train Grand Vitesse (TGV), 31   
Tramjatra project, 39   
Tramways, 39, 41   
Transparency, 104, 192–193   
Travel. See Mobility   
Tree adoption, 41   
Triple Bottom Line, 16   
TriSenx, 179   
Trompenaars, Alfons, 148   
Trucks, 9–10, 55, 58–59   
Trust, 42   
Tschumi, Bernard, 106   
T-Vision, 164–165   
Twelve Features of a Sustainable Society,   
16   
Twigg, Carol, 145   
Ultima Online, 151   
Unbundling, 124–125   
Understanding Computers and Cognition   
(Winograd and Flores), 172   
UNext, 138, 259–260n13   
Unicorn Children’s Theatre, 78–79   
Unisys, 169   
United Parcel Service (UPS), 56   
United States   
business logistics cost and, 55   
health issues and, 113–114, 121   
homeland security and, 200   
job quality and, 124

United States (cont.)

learning costs and, 137–138

Vision on Sustainable Product Innovation

Library of Congress and, 163–164

(Kathalys group), 16

United Technologies, 154

Vos, Esme, 88

University of British Columbia, 12– 13

University of California, 171

Waag Society, 84

Wackernagel, Mathis, 231n17

University of Chicago, 139

Walking, 72

Wall Street Journal, 42

University of Maryland, 140

WalMart, 92

University of Michigan, 139

Walt Disney Company, 100

University of Phoenix, 140, 260n21

Warehouses, 57

UN Studio, 108–109

Waste, 161–162, 192, 230n9

Urban gardens, 41

Urban planning, 18, 215, 247n17

Wearable computers, 4, 21, 37, 116, 198, 203

airports and, 100–103, 106–108

design-free zones and, 94–95

Weather, 10

edge effect and, 216–218

Websites, 78, 81, 88, 90, 130. See also Internet

mediascapes and, 83–96

barter, 126–127

MVRDV and, 81–83

health issues, 116, 122–123

networks and, 80–83

IDC, 229n5

obesity and, 72, 244n55

learning, 138–141, 145, 153

ontological alienation and, 100–111

parks and, 87

open source, 222

productivity and, 42

public utilities and, 88

scented, 179

sound research and, 175–176

travel, 207

spatial design and, 75–83

Weighting, 13–14

sprawl and, 5, 54–55

factors in, 15–17

Urban Unlimited, 40

faster-to-closer approach and, 67–70

Uricchio, William, 26

USENIX (Advanced Computing Systems Association), 244n50

load balancing and, 69

telepresence and, 60–67

U.S. Navy, 198

visibility for, 22–24

Weinstein, Michael, 203

Utilities, 88

Wellness monitoring services, 21

Utopia, 34

Wetware, 202

Wharton Business School, 138

Value chains, 42

Whirlpool Europe and, 45

van Berkel, Ben, 108

Whitelegg, John, 39, 54

Vest, Charles, 139, 260n17

Whole-systems thinking, 16–17

Viacom Outdoors, 83

Wild City: Urban Genetics project, 94–95

Vincent, Julian, 190–191, 194–197

Wilkhahn, 224

Vinkenoog, Simon, 269n64

Wilson, Edward O., 30, 133, 216

Viruses, 93

Visa, 30

Wind, Jerry, 138

Wind chimes, 176

Winkler, Nicolaus, 49   
Winnicott, David, 35, 103–104   
Winograd, Terry, 172–173   
Wireless Commons, 88   
Wireless communication networks. See   
Mediascapes   
Wireless graffiti, 84–85   
Wireless local loop (WLL), 90   
WISECARE, 115   
Wood, 197   
Woudhuysen, James, 208–209   
Workspheres, 98   
World Bank, 13, 154   
WorldBoard, 84   
World Economic Forum, 181   
World Health Organization (WHO), 13,   
253n3   
World Soundscape Project, 175   
World Wildlife Fund, 13   
Wurman, Richard Saul, 115   
Xerox, 191–192, 224   
Xinhua, 201   
X-rays, 203   
Zaccini, 49   
Zeldin, Theodor, 4, 151–152, 180–181,   
213, 228n10   
Zeroing out, 208–209   
Zimmerman, Thomas, 202–203   
Zoning laws, 5   
Zuboff, Shoshana, 129–130   
Zyra, 121
