> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Copyright © Daniel Miller 1987

First published 1987

Basil Blackwell Ltd 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK

Basil Blackwell Inc. 432 Park Avenue South, Suite 1503 New York, NY 10016, USA

All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher.

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise   
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

## British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

Miller, Daniel Material culture and mass consumption (Social archaeology). 1. Ethology I. Title II.Series 306'.4 GN316

ISBN 0-631-15605-4

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Miller, Daniel, 1954 Material culture and mass consumption.

(Social archaeology) Bibliography: p. Includes index.   
. Social archaeology-Philosophy. 2. Material   
culture. .Consumption (Economics)4. Object   
hilsophy) I. Title III. Series.   
C2.M55 1907 900.1 07-14027

ISBN 0-631-15605-4

Typeset in 10½/2 on 12 pt Garamond by OPUS, Oxford

## Contents

Preface vii   
Part I Objectfication 2 Hegel and Objectification m   
3 Marx: Objectification as Rupture 34   
4 Munn: Objectification as Culture 50   
5 Simmel: Objectification as Modernity 68   
Part II Material Culture 83   
6 The Humility of Objects 85   
7 Artefacts in their Contexts 109   
Part III Mass Consumption 131   
8 The Study of Consumption 133   
9 Object Domains, Ideology and Interests 158   
10 Towards a Theory of Consumption 178   
References 219   
Index 233

For Rachel

## Preface

Several actors have ifluence the writingf this book,an waeness of which may assist the reader in transcending the intentions of the author. First, my perspective evolved during the course of lecturing ithin the framework  Material Culture Stude Thi cateory may have had a coherent focus in the ninetenth century, under the influence of evolutionary studies in anthropology, but it has since become something of a residual box, housing otherwise 'homeless' interests such as the links between archaeology and social anthropology, or cross-cultural studies in the arts and technology. This lack of clear disciplinary allegiance has, however, afforded me the perhaps rare freedom to range over several disciplines in my discussion and to draw together threads which might otherwise have remained unconnected. Furthermore, the category may gain a new integrity as a basis for tackling topics such as mass consumption which have been neglected because they also happen to lie outside the particular emphases of the various branches of the social sciences as they have arisen historically.

The second influence dates back to my years as a graduate student. In attending interesting-sounding courses - whether in geography, architecture or psychology - I found that the chances were that the lecture would actually be on Habermas and a set of propositions which were very much the academic fashion of the time. Of these, the one which has best maintained its original impact is the denial of the fact-value dichotomy and the insistence that all academic work is informed by, and in turn contributes to, the moral and political climate within which it is conducted. In the present work I have attempted to address directly the relationship between my critical accounts of earlier writers and the models of possible future or ideal societies which lie implicit within such criticisms.

A third influence has been the experience of conducting fieldwork in several developing countries. I suspect that I am not alone in having found that my first period of fieldwork reinforced the initial

propensity in much anthropological enquiry to romanticize the place under investigation as idealized 'other', a perspective which focuses almost exclusively on its attractive features. This vision tends to fall away with subsequent studies and is, at least in part, replaced by a growing awareness of the constraints of poverty, close kin relations, and the generally limited possibilities available to people within non-industrial societies such as the archetypal peasant community. Experience of these constraints has curbed any tendency to indulge in easy nostalgia for assumed ancestral roots, and social life in earlier times. It has therefore seemed to me important to distinguish between a conflation of criticisms of the inequaltites and oppression associated with 'capitalism' or 'the state', and what may often be at root a general critique of industrial culture per se, based on a presumption of simple authenticity for pre-industrial culture. Afurther influence derives from the experience o conducting fieldwork which concentrated upon the social symbolism of the material world. This is the observation that an abiding concern with the precise status and social implications of the object world, which we tend to marginalize as existing only among 'yuppies', may in fact be manifested in an equally extreme form under the very different conditions of poverty, where lack of access to material goods may almost result in an involution of concern with those which are available. I appreciate that the result of my research is a book which advocates a perilous course of investigation. Both writer and reader may so easily fall prey to either fetishism of the object or else Romanticization of the subject; indeed, the attempt to avoid both of these has determined the very structure of this work. My overall intention has been to excavate certain areas o investigation formerly branded as l uenc' n to how wy   cucal r thee  e reclaimed as pivotal aspects of any present or feasible future industrialized society. I gratefully acknowledge the assistance given by the often critical readers o sections  th book, including Barbara Bender, Janet Coleman, Adrian Forty, Bruce Kapferer, Alison Kelly of Basil Blackwell and especially Allen Abramson, Stephen Frosh and Mike Rowlands who have provided stimulating debate throughout the period of writing. I am also grateful to Rickie Burman, who has shared many tasks which may not have seemed relevant to this book, but were actually essential to its production.

PARTI

Objectification

# Introduction

This book sets out to investigate the relationship between society and material culture, and to assess the consequences of the enormous increase in industrial production over the last century. It will be argued that academic study of the specific nature of the material artefact produced in society has been remarkably neglected, and that compared, for example, to the discipline of linguistics, our understanding of material culture is rudimentary in the extreme. This lack of concern with the nature of the artefact appears to have emerged simultaneously with the quantitative rise in the production and mass distribution of material goods. The average inhabitant of a country such as Britain uses, and is associated with, a range of clothing, furnishing, technology, buildings, and other objects which is vast in extent, complexity and diversity compared to any previous era. In short, our culture has become to an increasing degree a material culture based on an object form. It will be suggested in the course of this volume that the very physicality of the object which makes it appear so immediate, sensual and assimilable belies its actual nature, and that material culture is one of the most resistant forms of cultural expression in terms of our attempts to comprehend it.

The physicality of the material world is, however, only one of the reasons for this neglect. Equally important is a series of academic trends which have led to an overwhelming concentration on the area of production as the key generative arena for the emergence of the dominant social relations in contemporary societies, and a comparative neglect of consumption, together with a concomitant failure to observe the actual changes which have taken place over the last century in the balance of influence between these two forms of interactions with goods. A further major cause of neglect has been the tendency on all sides of the political spectrum to subscribe to certain blanket assumptions concerning the negative consequences of the growth of material culture. This culture has been associated with an increasingly 'materialistic' or 'fetishistic' attitude, which is held to have arisen through a focusing on relations to goods per se at the expense of genuine social interaction. These assumptions are responsible for the emergence of a variety of generally nihilistic and global critiques of 'modern' life, which have tended to detract from the intensive analysis at the micro-level of the actual relationship between people and goods in industrial societies, and a remarkable paucity of positive suggestions of a feasible nature as to how industrial society might appropriate its own culture.

I have approached these questions by starting from a discussion of the subject-object relationship at the most abstract philosophical level and progressing by stages to an analysis of certain highly specific aspects of everyday life. A further understanding of the place of goods in society requires a general perspective on the relationship between people and things. Such a perspective belongs, however, to a larger set of ideas about the nature of society and the processes generally falling into the category of 'culture', and therefore entails wider philosophical questions. In view of this, I have begun by considering a key moment in the development of Western philosophy and its constant struggle with the problem of the subject-object duality: that is, the publication of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. I have abstracted from this work a set of processes which are then extended and compared to parallel ideas in a number of other academic disciplines; together, these ideas lead to a general grounding of the original set of arguments in the mundane world. From philosophical studies of the subject-object duality and its resolution in a dynamic process of becoming is derived a tentative theory of culture concerned with the relationship between the human subject and the external world. As a sub-set of this theory of culture, is derived an approach to material culture as a particular form of such externalization. From such abstractions the approach moves on to consider the specific material culture of contemporary Britain, and finally to propose a tentative theory of the nature of modern mass consumption as the dominant context through which we relate to goods.

This sequence results in some unusual juxtapositions. The tendency in modern, highly specialized academic research is for philosophical discussions to take place within the relatively abstract terms set by that discipline, while micro-ethnographic studies of specific aspects of social organization tend to be bound by the relativism of the particular, and lend themselves to philosophical analysis mainly as critiques of philosophy's pretensions to generality. In the present t, of philosophical concepts by grounding them in the everyday world ofthe high-street shopping centres, and in turn to understand better the elah -p it theorists such as Simmel or Piaget.

Such a strategy involves the rather perilous activity of taking objects which are generally regarded as trivial, and holding them up for academic scrutiny. Unless one is a Duchamp working within the confines of high art, or has the literary brilliance of Barthes, this breaking of disciplinary 'frames' and the treatment of bay windows and melamine boards as linchpins of modern culture may rapidly lay the author open to charges of afectation. It is evident, however, that those same people who shy away from considered discussion of such objects readily part with a large proportion of their income to acquire them. Indeed, the relative ascription of 'importance' and 'triviality', and the fixedness of these categories, is itself a matter whose explicit discussion may provide major clues as to the nature of material culture, and help to account for its comparative neglect in academic studies.

A further general aim of this work is to concentrate on the positive elements of the model being constructed. Unlike many of the writers who have followed Hegel, I do not intend to strike a tragic pose, bewailing an oppressive fate which we cannot control, in the name of a utopia we have either just left or are about to create. First, because I believe, with the modernists, and in the tradition of some post-Enlightenment theorists, that many of the changes that have taken place during recent centuries are themselves extremely positive, providing the basis for new kinds of equality, knowledge and social development which were previously unimaginable, let alone achievable, for anything but a tiny minority of the population. But secondly because, unlike many modernists, I do not regard these as the exclusive achievement of planners, leaders, artists and individuals, but rather as the result of large-scale social movements which have enabled ever expanding sectors of the mass population to appropriate these advantages. Furthermore, I believe that there are reasons for thinking that this trend may be sustained, though only through continual struggle, in the future. The material surveyed in the latter stages of this book provides evidence for giving credit for such developments back where it is due  to the mass populace - and for claiming a perspicacity and subtlety in mass behaviour which is a far cry from the passivity, illusion and denigration implied in many self-proclaimed radical perspectives.

The development of such a positive stance regarding the possibilities for mass consumption is intended as a critical perspective; that is, one that condemns the status quo by developing a model of society which could be attained and yet is rarely even aimed for at present. As such, this view contrasts with the perspective currently predominant in the academically oriented social sciences. For example, the movements and authors loosely grouped under the 'meta-label' of post-structuralism, the various strands of which claim to be radical on the basis of a similar condemnatory attitude, may actually be found to provide only conservative and nihilistic assessments of the ubiquity and thus the inevitability of oppression. This, along with the massive impact on the social sciences over the last two decades of Marxist theory concentrating on a wide variety of exploitative and oppressive institutions, may suggest that in the late 1980s the principal critical challenge is to produce alternative perspectives directly relevant to the recent transformations and developments in both socialist and non-socialist societies.

My present aim is to examine any such tendencies already evident in industrial societies, and to indicate in what way they offer a model for feasible social change. More specifically with respect to material culture, the book concludes with the argument that these positive possibilities are clearly immanent within the consumption activities of mass populations today.

## The Shape of Things to Come

A large proportion of the classic texts on social theory, including, in different ways, those by Marx, Freud, Durkheim, Weber and the Frankfurt School writers, focus on the possibilities for resolving the contradictions of modernity. Over the last century, however, there has been a radical change in our perception of what it is that constitutes the 'modern', and any fresh consideration of these familiar themes must involve some degree of detachment from the trajectories of social theory, and a re-immersion in, and a re-examination of, the nature of the problem itself.

Many of the concerns of this work are based on observations of trends in contemporary British society. At the time of writing I am undertaking fieldwork in London which differs from my previous experience in ethnographic research in a South Asian village or the South Paciic in that most of the discussions and observations have to take place outside the public domain, in the context of people's homes. This experience of entering a series of very private domains, selected not because the occupants share common interests as 'friends' or a common origin as 'relatives', but solely because of their residence on a particular housing estate, gives me the impression that there is an increasing disparity between the subjects of public concern, political rhetoric or academic debate, and the experiences of everyday life. There seems to be a particular discrepancy between an enormous public interest  he v people's wages, the ole, and publi services, and the lack of any comparable interest, outside the commercial sector, in exactly what people do with the money or services received; that is, how they transfer them back into the construction of worlds. This suggests that we respect in analysis the same public/private duality that we ourselves practise. It is worth noting that the market researcher has shown much less trepidation than the academic in crossing this boundary.

Some of the interests which appear to dominate people's private lives have been reflected in a new literature. For example, the widespread fascination for television soap operas, exploited by large numbers of newspaper articles about the private lives of the actors and actresses involved is reflected in the ise of 'media studiese. Collins et al. 1986). There is, as yet, however, no comparable concern with similarly important domains, such as home furnishing and supermarket shopping. In particular, outside of the specific interest in gender roles and domesticity found in feminist studies, there is a comparative lack of literature on the increase in home-centred activities, developing local institutions such as babysitting circles or hobbies from which new social networks are emerging (see, however, Young and Willmott 1973; Gershuny 1978; Pahl 1984; Wallman 1982). While television provides the illusion of a hitherto unrivalled voyeurism, leaving nightly the impression of having witnessed the very private affairs of a wide range of households, its impact on the behaviour of actual neighbourhoods is much less understood.

As an example, imagine walking along one of the streets or corridors on a London council estate. The variety of attitudes people may have to the estate itself has only occasionally been documented (Andrews 1979; Parker 1983). It soon becomes clear that any attempt to use normative models to describe the individual household is ideologically charged. Whether one refers to the traditional 'norm' of the nuclear family or to some alternative, all such models appear to hide the actual experience, which seems to be perversely opposed to any ordered characterization. This contradiction is most evident in the radical difference between the modernist façade of the high-rise flats, with doors painted identical colours by the council, and what lies behind, where each householder has played bricoleur with the facilities provided, supplemented by goods purchased on the market.

Moving along the corridor, if flat one may be imagined to hold a single Cypriot divorcee with her children, then flat two may house a married couple who have moved from Blackpool with the kids and grandparents, flat three a nuclear family born in the area, flat four an elderly retired single male born in Ireland, and flat five a locally born teenager whose parents emigrated from the West Indies. Ethnic and family type are, however, only the most evident dimensions of this diversity, the full extent of which becomes apparent as one begins to examine degrees of affluence, self-esteem, political viewpoint, holidays taken, social networks, allocation of leisure time, or a hundred other variables. This diversity is echoed in the furnishing and style of the interior: in one flat, the facilities provided by the council may hardly have been changed; in the next, a mass of jumbled gifts, redundant furnishings which could not quite be thrown away, and items retained for possible future use may be stored without apparent order and filling the space to its limits; in the third, a striking and dominant style may have been imposed: a series of coordinated colours, textures and shapes creating a systematic and deliberate impression of 'modernity' One flat seems focused on the television, the next on the dining table, the third on the children's toys. The symbolism of the objects runs the gamut from futuristic hi-tech modernity through to pastiches of Victorian or even medieval styles, often within the same household and even within the same room.

An extraordinary feature of modern British life is the number and diversity of interests held behind these doors: a fanatic supporter of a football club lives next to a family that keeps an exotic range of pets; a follower of a pop group lives next to a political radical. Any one of these different cultural foci may become a central point of concern and identity. Television and the media continue to uncover the world champion hairdresser and the fancy-pigeon breeder, the bibliophile and the expert on coalholes. In this respect, the division of labour from civil servant to store detective, secretary, windowdresser, unemployed person, teacher or machine operator becomes only another dimension of difference.

An inescapable conclusion from such observation is that the culture of most people is of a very particular kind. The average person's relatively passive and infrequent interaction with the performed arts or entertainments appears largely inconsequential, while for those who live on a council estate or suburb in London, social activities based on the neighbourhood or community may be extraordinarily spare More iing e te y activ fud iv by means of which people transform resources both purchased through the market and allocated by the council into expressive environments, daily routines and often cosmological ideals: that is, ideas about order, morality and family, and their relationships with T structured conventions of a mythology; as amongst the classic 'peoples'of social anthropology, its foundations are comparatively weak in this respect. Even images of stability, such as nostalgia, are continually restructured and reinvented according to individual domestic situations and expectations. While not denying the impact of the larger social and economic forces which help to construct such relationships, what has been neglected in the analysis of such forces is the mass response which may often be echoed in these micro and home-centered activities. Despite the high degree of our actual involvement in these cultural activities, they tend barely to be acknowledged, and their pivotal position in modern culture certainly remains quite unappreciated.

The trend towards diversity as such is hardly new. Many of the major theorists who have examined the nature of modern society have also attempted to represent the aura evoked by the scale and diversity of the goods on the marketplace. Those who were in a position to observe the birth of mass consumption, such as Simmel, Veblen and later Benjamin, have provided perhaps the most acute accounts. The interest in consumption as the key to the problem of social development, current at the time of Durkheim (Williams 1982) has since markedly declined. In recent years, only one sustained attempt has been made to encompass this diversity within a totalizing perspective which might provide an order for its elucidation, while simultaneously confronting it in its particularity (Bourdieu 1984). Bourdieu's emphasis is on artefacts as a consumer aid in the major struggle for social positioning, this relational activity taking precedence as a practice over the abstraction of class (Bourdieu 1985). Judgements are made according to the brand names used, the up-to-dateness of goods, and their arrangement. Increasingly, however, other activities are placed within the same framework. Political opinions or views on controversial issues may be canvassed less because of concern with the apparent subject of debate than as a means of placing the individual socially; that is of relating their attitude to CND or immigration to our own. Social positioning is, however, only one element in the construction of identity, and Bourdieu's account is usefully complemented by the study of goods as categories (Douglas and Isherwood 1979), the impact of a single object form in a variety of cultural settings (King 1984) or the analysis of a given domain within the mass market, such as fashion (Wilson 1985).

At one level, these features must be connected to the nature of capitalist production. It is clear that branding policies, design, targeting of goods, and company competition are all part of the process of developing close links between social and commodity difference (Forty 1986; Haug 1986), but the relationship is not simple. The predictions of academics such as Galbraith (1979) and several varieties of Marxist critic (e.g. Ewen and Ewen 1982), who emphasized the corporate control of capitalism, may not have been fulfilled. From the 1920s through to the 1960s, commerce, influenced by factors such as economies of scale, attempted to construct a highly predictable, homogenized and consistent market, which would allow for longer factory runs and high profitability. This is clearly reflected in the advertising of the period which was designed to break down local, ethnic and other customary sub-divisions in the population (Leiss 1983: 19). Commerce was thereby attempting to create a world mirrored in modernist imagery of science-fiction, a future in which all forms of ethnic or regional particularity have been suppressed and replaced by a homogeneous, 'designed' population. Observers who livd through the fities may have seen it as representing the triumph of the logic of technocracy.

In recent years, however, the expected continuity of this trajectory has been called into question. The rise of a new diversity in the market has produced a curious shift in production. Factoriés have had to move from long runs of identical goods to much shorter runs providing specific forms for increasingly fluid target populations. Given the new ethnicity (e.g. Smith 1981), and the dissolution of the major accepted gender-based models, this diversity seems set to increase. This has led to a less predictable, and for advertising often less 'addressable', population. Naturally, commerce has adapted to such changes. The microchip embedded in industrial machinery now allows for much smaller runs and maintains profits (Murray 1985), but this ability to adapt does not reduce the degree to which industrial production appears to have had to follow rather than dictate these elements of social change.

Academic approaches to modern diversity are almost always condemnatory. Diversity is taken to represent a new superficiality and an alienated form of existence, lacking both authenticity and depth. A number of versions of this critique have recently come together through the development of the term 'post-modernism', which has become a means of both defining and condemning this feature of modernity (e.g. Jameson 1984). The history of academic analysis suggests that such approaches, evident, for example, in many of the Frankfurt School writings, seem destined to end in nihilism and elitism. Most common among them is an evaluative or aesthetic stance based on a view of authenticity found in some narrower definitions of culture which assign the label authentic to the fie arts, opera and literature on the one hand, and to the music hall or a particular form of labour on the other.

Although on the surface such definitions appear to be evaluations of taste and style, they are always in effect denigrations of those people who are associated with the 'other' material and expressive forms. One social group condemns kitsch and soap opera, along with the mass interest in Benidorm or supermarkets; the other is appalled by the mass middle-class culture devoid of any true sense of history'or even of the present. In effect, only small minorities may be equated with the 'genuine' cultures of leisure or poverty. This antipathy to middle-class or inauthentic working-class culture may, however, extend to around three-quarters of Britons today. The alternative is to concentrate upon precisely this 'unpopular' culture: the do-ityourself warehouses, the bingo halls, the fitted kitchens and the inauthentic' rag-bag and plurality of identities which make up most people's lives. A similar set of problems would arise if these were treated as positive and authentic simply because they represent mass or popular culture; but it is nevertheless essential to recognize that, however we perceive them, they constitute the major forms taken by contemporary industrial culture. As such, they need to be analysed as specific forms, and not merely dismissed as a fragmented descent from priivueniciyujccassian nor as merely the symbol of capitalist oppression, nor yet as the mere surface of a superficial era.

Perhaps the major shortcoming of many theories of the concept of culture is that they identify culture with a set of objects, such as the arts in themselves, rather than seeing it as an evaluation of the relationship through which objects are constituted as social forms. For such theories mass populations may be regarded as themselves inauthentic because of the supposed status of their associated environment as, for example, a capitalist or post-modernist culture. Culture, as this book will attempt to demonstrate, is always a process and is never reducible to either its object or its subject form. For this reason, evaluation should always be of a dynamic relationship, never of mere things.

The mirror image of an analysis of objects in themselves is the assumption that society and social relations exist in themselves. The foundation of this defence of the 'seriousness' of modern mass culture is, then, the refusal to isolate it as a symbol or a derivative of some prior set of social relations. Most critics of mass culture tend to assume that the relation of persons to objects is in some way vicarious, fetishistic or wrong; that primary concern should lie with direct social relations and 'real' people. The belief underlying this attitude is often that members of pre-industrial societies, free of the burden of artefacts, lived in more immediate natural relationship with each other. This kind of academic criticism extends the distaste evident in colloquial discourse for materialism as an apparent devaluation of people against commodities. I shall question the implication that separable real selves and authentic classes are to be found. I shall argue that people cannot be reified under the concept of 'society' outside of their own cultural milieu. Indeed, much of the first half of this book will be devoted to an attempt to transcend the dualism implied in the very concept of 'society'.

## Summary of the Argument

This book is divided into three sections: the first, comprising chapters two to five, sets out the general approach through an examination of the concept of 'objectification'; the second, comprising chapters six and seven, is devoted to the specific nature of the object as artefact; and the third, comprising chapters eight to ten, develops an approach to modern mass consumption. Each section utilizes a particular style and methodology, which it may be helpful to have introduced here, together with a summary of the contents.

The key term in the first section is 'objectification', which will be developed as an initial model to which a series of analyses will be compared. The term is used to describe a series of processes consisting of externalization (self-alienation) and sublation (reabsorption) through which the subject of such a process is created and developed. These processes are first abstracted from Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, and are then used as the basis for a theory of culture. Since this abstraction proceeds by isolating certain elements of Hegel's work while ignoring the surrounding context within which these ideas were developed, the approach, although taken from a specific source, could not be termed Hegelian. As with all of the authors subsequently discussed, the abstraction of a set of particular ideas will be a somewhat violent one, which may involve the rejection of much of the author's contextual argument, terminology and exemplification. This procedure is justified by the contention that both Hegel and the later authorities have captured something in their use of these central ideas which is not dependent upon the particular manner in which they have developed them, but which may be used to construct another meaning through the accretative insights of diverse usages in various domains.

The third chapter is devoted to what might otherwise be a severe problem for any contemporary attempt to use the term objectification modern parlance of that term with a specific form of Marxist analysis emphasizing the rupture in social relations through which people are effectively reduced to objects, and objects in turn interpose themselves in relationships between people. This interpretation of Hegel's work will be rejected, and the processes which are described under the term objectification will be retained as a positive model of the subject's potential development, rather than as a negative critique of a rupture in any such development. However, while rejecting this particular form o Marxist analysis as an approach to these questions, many other aspects of Marx's grounding of the philosphical abstractions of Hegel in the actual practices of ordinary peoples will be adopted.

Chapter four moves on to consider the discipline of social anthropology, and establishes the concept of objectification as culture in a non-industrial context. It examines Munn's work on the iconography of a group of Australian aborigines and on the Melanesian kula exchange system. Once again, certain striking parallels may be found: not only is the concept of cultural form developed by the anthropologist reflected in the model of culture as objectification, but there is also evidence that a similar model of such processes is held by the peoples amongst whom the anthropologist has lived and worked. The material is important not only for identifying these parallels at an abstract level, but also because it can be applied to the analysis of the construction and use of the external world of objects, and because it asserts the absolute necessity of culture for the establishment of all human relations, and discredits the idea that the relationship between people and the things they construct in the physical world is separable from some prior form of social relation.

The final chapter in the first section moves back to a more direct encounter with Hegel's ideas since the Phenomenology of Spirit is the model behind the core text for discussion within this chapter: The Philosophy of Money by the sociologist Georg Simmel. Since Simmel remains one of the very few authors who have specifically addressed the question of the quantitative rise of material culture and its consequences, he provides an important bridge between the first section of the present work and the remainder of the book. Furthermore, his ideas have influenced one of my main arguments: that is, an assertion of the intrinsically contradictory nature of industrial society and the impossibility of resolving the conflict inherent in that culture. This will, however, be used to construct a positive, rather than, as with Simmel, a tragic, reading of the possibilities of social development.

The idea of intrinsic and irresolvable contradiction will be used to legitimize a consistent rejection of that Romanticism which stems from a belief that the goal of academic study is the development of a model of society as a coherent totality. In different ways this Romanticism underlies Hegel's absolute knowledge, Marx's Communism, and Simmel's appeal to aesthetics, as well as many later developments in European social theory (Jay 1984). Rather than attempting to propose some utopian end to history, the emphasis will be on the means of living with an inevitable contradiction.

The rather unusual style of analysis of the first section may be accounted for by the dearth of writings sharing a similar perspective to the present study. The method employed is to examine a series of texts by authors who saw themselves as working on quite different issues, but whose ideas are here reinterpreted in order to consider their implications for the concerns outlined above. It is suggested that, although the authors were working in different disciplines on a variety of topics, a series of parallels underlies their texts (as with Piaget and Klein, discussed in chapter 6), which suggests that they were drawn towards a common perspective which may be argued through abstraction to be addressed to the nature of culture.

This attempt to show that texts on one topic may offer insights into a quite different subject results in what may be considered an extremely cavalier treatment of the authors concerned. Such a view is justified in so far as my intention is not to present a balanced representation of the authors' position which would satisfy both themselves and the field within which they worked, but rather to abstract very particular elements of their arguments, distributing emphasis quite differently than is usual, and in a sense rewriting the argument in the light of another goal. I am not concerned, then, to consider or assess the authors in the light of their own history, or the development of their discipline at the time. My overall aim is to gain a better understanding of material culture, not of Hegel or Munn themselves. What all these texts have in common, however, is a very great profundity in their analysis of their respective problems, with which little can compare in the specific area of material culture studies. As a result of this profundity, these texts offer ideas and models which transcend their specific dilemmas and may be employed in discussion  questions the uthors themselves may never dcly have considered.

The second section, consisting of two chapters, turns from analysis of such academic texts to consideration of the more specific consequences of the materiality of the object as artefact. The approach tculture n general deveope in the rst secion  therby arwd to the problem of the artefact as a single example of cultural form. In chapter 6, an attempt is made to address directly the implications of the materiality of the artefact. First, psychological and psychoanalytic studies are examined which suggest a particular place for the object in the development of the subject, underlining certain implications of the discusionspay gest ffni beteen aua consciousness as against the artefact and the unconscious.

There follows a more general discussion of the differences between words and things, and an examination of the close relationship between the object, its context and its place in social reproduction as represented by the arguments of the French social anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu. A number of the points raised suggest reasons for the comparative neglect of artefactual studies in academia, providing the background to chapter 7 in which, following a general survey of material culture studies, a somewhat elliptical approach is taken to the artefact in its context. The importance of considering the artefact as such is argued mainly, not in the abstract, but through examination of a number of more familiar fields of enquiry such as function, exchange, space and style. Case studies are shown to offer illustrations of the specific consequences of the physicality of material culture for investigations which would otherwise have tended to ignore this particular aspect of their own evidence.

The view of the object as embedded in specific cultural contexts is fundamental to the third section, which is concerned with mass consumption as the major constitutive arena in which the relationship of people to artefacts is determined in contemporary industrial societies. It is argued that consumption has suffered a neglect in our assessment of history (for example that of Britain over the last three centuries) comparable in some ways to the neglect of the artefact itself, and not unrelated in cause. Disciplines such as marketing which are concerned with present-day consumption are found to provide for very specific interests mainly devoted to the point of sale; by contrast, there has recently developed in social anthropology a degree of concern with consumption as a larger and less transient social process, a dominant influence within which has been a form of analysis in which differences in artefacts become grounded in social distinctions. Particular consideration is given to the book Distinction (Bourdieu 1984).

Chapter  continues the trend towards particularityof analysis by summarizing a series of studies of the objects of modern consumption ranging from children's sweets to semi-detached houses. Such micro-studies are contrasted to a trend in modern social theory arising in particular from post-structuralism and from the critique of post-modernism, both of which tend towards a global critique of 'modern' society, usually under a general term such as 'capitalism'or the 'sign'. It is argued that these global approaches almost always move from an attack on contemporary material culture as trivial or inauthentic to an implied (though rarely explicit) denigration of the mass of the population whose culture this is. By contrast, the analysis of particular domains of consumption provided in this chapter allows for a more sensitive discrimination between those elements of consumption which appear to generate close social relations and social groupings (such as those among children or neighbourhoods) and those which, by analogy with the critique of ideology, appear to act to prevent sections of the population from representing their interests, i to develop such interests.

It will be clear that the overall argument progresses through highly diverse material and foci. The justification for such an eclectic approach is provided in chapter ten, in which the original theoretical and philosophical model is reanalysed in terms of the artefact as the object of mass consumption. It is argued that contemporary society consists of a series of extremely abstract arenas of social and material order, including commerce, academia, the state and other major institutions. These have arisen in part as the means of producing vast quantities of artefacts, which are in turn distributed through mechanisms such as the market or government services. The scale of contemporary productive and distributive institutions is such that they are commonly the target of that general analysis of modernity which defines the growth of social complexity in terms of 'fragmentation', 'abstraction' or inauthenticity', all of which are posed as major dilemmas and threats to modern life. Here, however, it is asserted that such institutions are essential to a number of developments which are the foundation for all progressive tendencies in modern society, and that although they are never assimilable in theselves they must  preserved. Propositions or a future sty involving the elimination or fading away of massive and abstracted institutions such as industrial production or the state are rejected. Since, however, these remain by definition abstract, and since they all include tendencies towards an autonomy in which as separate interests (or example, as capitalism or state power) they may emerge as forces almost entirely deleterious to the interests of the mass population, the argument highlights a central contradiction intrinsic to modern ymey o  e e   y i o su istiutions while voiding their potential danrs.

It is suggested that this contradiction may be partially resolved through the use of these very products, that is the vast quantity of goods and services created by industrial culture. There may be mechanisms which permit the positive appropriation of these goods by, and at the level of, the inevitably pluralistic, small-scale communities which make up the population. This appropriation takes place through an expanded process of consumption by means of which goods and services are distanced from the abstracted and alien, but necessary, institutions in which they originate, and are recast as inalienable cultural material. It is argued that this process of consumption is equivalent to the Hegelian concept of sublation as the movement by which society reappropriates its own external form - that is, assimilates its own culture and uses it to develop itself as a social subject. So, far from being merely an extension of those social conditions and relations generated by the organization of production, consumption is, at least potentially, their negation. I also show to be unfounded the assumption that an increasing orientation towards goods is itself inevitably inimical to the development of communal and egalitarian social relations of a positive nature. Such a perspective must complement the proper concerns with macro-political forces if large-scale political changes are to be understood in relation to their effect on social practices, and not just as academic abstractions. It is not argued that this is a description of all contemporary consumption practices, many of which are very far from expressing any such goals, but rather that these are immanent in the nature of mass consumption, and that, depending upon the outcome of particular social strategies, they may be identified and learnt from even within existing society.

This depends, however, upon a view of consumption quite different from that which is current and colloquial. Consumption is considered here as a process having the potential to produce an inalienable culture. This assumes a recognition that our culture is increasingly a material culture which must in some way be made an instrument of social progression. It is further argued that, while consumption is generally considered to be of greatest consequence and at the same time most oppressive under the conditions of capitalism, it is also the single major means of living with the societal contradictions which would pertain under the conditions of either existing or possible socialism (given that this is taken to be a social order associated with the equitable distribution of goods and services and dominated by a socially concerned planning system, as opposed to the relatively unconstrained operation of the market). Ünder such conditions of socialism, the role of consumption as outlined above would become even more crucial to possibilities for positive social reproduction.

This argument contains within itself certain limits as a theoretical analysis. Theory itself is identified with those series of abstractions associated with the modern institution, while consumption by contrast is identified with a series of practices which are by their very nature embedded and particularistic. The conclusion therefore points towards an anthropology of consumption. Even under contemporary political and economic conditions, the ideal of consumption outlined here may be found to be practised by at least certain sections of the population in particular contexts, although this ideal coexists with a form of consumption expressive only of individual greed, class oppression and mass alienation. An anthropology would therefore seek to identify those conditions which appear to promote, as opposed to those which appear to prevent, the development of the positive forms of consumption as a process. Yet although research may be instrumental in identifying and encouraging these conditions, they must always in the final instance depend upon the development of mass movements.

In conclusion, an approach to modern society which focuses on the material object always invites the risk of appearing fetishistic, that is of ignoring or masking actual social relations through its concern with the object per se. In this book, an attempt is made to develop a non-dualistic model of the relations between people and things. This is achieved by approaching objectification as a process of development in which neither society nor cultural form is privileged as prior, but rather seen as mutually constitutive. When cast in terms of the contemporary political economy, such an approach sheds new light on the place of the artefact within the process of mass consumption as an essential element in the construction of both present and possible societies. By uncovering a model for consumption as a progressive possibility, a critical understanding of society may be achieved, founded upon an image based less upon what industrial culture has forced us to become than upon what it might allow us to be.
