> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Hegel and Objectification

## Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit

The sources for the ideas used in this volume to construct a theory of material culture are various. Several of them are, however, united in that although they appear to relate to quite discrete bodies of material and to provide different theoretical emphases and conclusions, they derive at least in part from a common inspiration. This is the Phenomenology of Spirit (or 'Mind' in some translations) by G. W. Hegel, first published in 1807 (here 1977). This is perhaps the single most influential work in modern philosophy and social theory, and a large number of major studies including works by the early Marx, Simmel, Lukács and Sartre, have been modelled more or less directly upon it. Some of these texts will be discussed below. Many of Hegel's ideas have been further elaborated in the phenomenological tradition within philosophy, while a larger number of studies may have taken over the basic structure of Hegel's work without perhaps realizing this, or without being acquainted with their source,  pervasive have Hegel's ideas become.

Defining Hegel as a starting point is in one sense false. Hegel was not himself the orginator of many of the ideas commonly ascribed to him. Many were developed in their modern form by earlier and contemporary philosophers such as Fichte. The work of many of these philosophers in turn may be more easily understood when analysed in the light of ideas which had previously been developed in theological seminaries. In fact, Hegel's work forms part of an important movement which effectively secularized theological arguments concerning the relationship between God and humankind. Religious ideals and methods are strongly present in Hegel and, through him, in many of those who were deeply influenced by the Phenomenology (Kolakowski 1978: 11-39).

The intention of the present discussion is to abstract relatively few elements from the Phenomenology, rather than to follow previous attempts to translate the whole structure into some other context. As a result, the majority of Hegel's ideas and the form in which they were expressed will be either ignored or abandoned. The argument will be that one particular concept - to be denoted by the term 'objectification' - represents one of Hegel's most significant achievements in terms of its contemporary relevance. To use this concept for some alternative purpose, however, it must first be abstracted from the philosophical project for which it was created. The method will be to introduce objectification in its original Hegelian context as part of a very brief account of the contents of the Phenomenology, and then to examine how, through a process of abstraction, it may be used as the foundation for a theory of culture, and more specifically for a theory of modernity. It will be argued that the popularity and use made of Hegel's work lies in a kind of resonance, a feeling that he had captured the essence of something he may never himself have fully acknowledged, and which is only partially addressed in the manifest content of the Phenomenology, about the nature of the world around him.

It is difficult to establish the position of certain of Hegel's ideas within the general context of this work, since that context may be defined in a variety of ways, focusing either upon the philosophical trajectory which led up to it or upon the social conditions which prevailed at the time. Hegel's immediate point of departure was the vast philosophical tradition he inherited, and his work was intended to address directly the questions which had for so long permeated philosophical discussion. These questions centred upon the so called 'subject-object' dualism which had been a pivotal problem in western philosophy since the period of Classical Greece. The particular forms of this dualism addressed by Hegel were those posed by the traditions of Kant and Descartes, traditions which asserted reason against the world, providing two radically different ways in which the world may be apprehended. A similarly immediate concern was the particular use Fichte had made of the Romantic tradition, through which he posited an idealized history of human self-realization as a judgement upon the actual history of mankind.

This dualism was by no means the only philosophical conundrum addressed in the Phenomenology. There was also, amidst more general discussions of epistemology, the question of how we can know anything outside ourselves. Hegel was concerned to affirm his idea of an objective science against both the extreme subjectivism and metaphysics of some of the Romantics and the extreme distancing of man from nature, evident in the empiricist tradition which developed from the Enlightenment. There was also an underlying theme, developed more fully  ther works, reating t the nature poliical and juridical order and, in particular, the place of the state. Study of the heologynly partyreveals  relatnship t these sses, which might become more apparent in the context of Hegel's other writings. However, since the present concern is not with the place of Hegel or the trajectory of his own philosophy, his contribution to these questions and the place of major works such as the Logic will be ignored.

The Phenomenology takes the form not of an argument, but of a story: it is a narrative - sequential, accretative and essentially linear. It has been called the 'autobiography of the spirit (or mind). One of the many problems of analysing this narrative lies in identifying the subject, because the very essence of this story concerns the transformas taki laceubj el  eul   c, so that what at one point may be termed mind can elsewhere be identified with spirit, reason and religion. In short, the definition of the subject is inseparable form the stage of development it has reached.

Fortunately, the process itself is largely repetitive; the Hegelian subject at each stage is carried forward by a sequence of processes in which it first extends itself through creation, and then becomes aware of that created 'something' which appears as outside of itself. This continues until the consciousness of the external becomes a dissatisfaction with the state of separation from that which is properly part of the subject. This dissatisfaction, however, is the motor force which allows for the recognition and then the reincorporation of the external into the subject; now at one with that part of itself which it had externalized as its creation, and the subject is transformed by virtue of this incorporation into itself.

Two quotations illustrate how Hegel presents this process. In the first, where he is talking about the externalization of the world in culture, he notes:

the existence of this world, as also the actuality of selfconsciousness, rests on the process in which the latter divests itself of its personality, thereby creating its world. This world it looks on as something alien, a world, therefore, of which it must now take possession. (1977: 297).

Then taion  tet ariz e os end

Self-consciousness knows the nothingness of the object, on the one hand, because it externalizes its own self - for in this externalization it posits itself as an object, or the object as itself, in virtue of the indivisible unity of being-for-self. On the other hand, this positing at the same time contains the other moment, viz. that self-consciousness has equally superseded this externalization and objectivity too, and taken it back into itself so that it is in communion with itself in its otherness as such (ibid. 479).

The basis of this process is Hegel's conception of the rationality of the actual. Unlike Kant, for whom order arises out of the mechanisms by which we apprehend the world, Hegel posits a universal rationality, intrinsic to the objective world, which we can come to know. This is, however, a highly sophisticated form of knowledge which may be achieved only as the culmination of all history and philosophy. The sequence begins with an unreflective humanity at home in an immediate subject-object relation. From this state, it gradually achieves a distance from nature, moving towards an increasingly self-conscious and differentiated concretization of being. This separation is the prerequisite for the development of an explicit understanding of the ultimate order in the world, mainly through a progressive philosophy. It is this assertion of a prior order towards which humanity strives which allows Hegel to claim that he is describing a necessary and logical movement.

In the very first instance of this process, the subject is hard to describe, since it is entirely unconscious and undifferentiated. In the first stage (1977: 58103) the subject must struggle towards an awarenesss that it actually is; but this can only be achieved by its becoming aware that there is something it actually is not. Awareness of the self is predicted on awareness of the 'other', and it is the process of creation and acknowledgement of the other which is the key to the achievement of self-awareness. What is required is not merely the process of separation and incorporation but also a knowledge that this process is taking place, and, finally, an understanding of the nature of this process. In short, we start with an undifferentiated substance, which achieves a separation into subject and object. The subject thereby comes to know of itself as non-other, and thus acquires development is predicated upon differentiation, as the originally abstract and generalized humanity becomes increasingly concretized into particular being.

This sequence is repeated at a number of levels. At each stage the u ar h ohe  stance om itIt then realizes that h apparently alien othe s nact a prouct  itselceateas a mir by means of which it might further its own self-awareness. This process of understanding permits the subject to reincorporate the increasingly complex external world it has created, and by so doing to emerge as an increasingly complex subject. Having progressed from ther-awareness' to sel-awareness, the subject comes to realize that it is not the only subject to perceive these relationships; it becomes aware of other subjects and thus of social relations and the foundations of morality. At first, the subject is more easily identified as a kind of 'mind' seeking awareness, and indeed Hegel's early examples are of individuals in relationship with each other, for example the famous master and slave relationship (Hegel 1977: 111-18; Arthur 1983). As the subject develops in sophistication, however, its awareness of social relations expands. As humanity comes increasingly to posit nature as its other, and to develop itself by incorporating the knowledge thereby gained, it gradually reaches a level of sophistication which may be identified with reason. Reason confers upon the Hegelian subject an increasing awareness of much wider transcendent and collective forces. This awareness emerges as a new sense of totalizing or universal phenomena, providing the subject with the basis for itself being recognized as a more ambitious and encompassing phenomenon, which Hegel terms 'spirit' (Hegel 1977: 263).

The concept of spirt Geist) expresses Hegel's sense o the universal order which is to be indentified with God's will embodied in the world. As reason develops it is externalized through a series of ever more sophisticated forms which approach this same universality. Since these forms, which are identified, for example, with morality and law, express a relationship which would normally characterize that between the individual and the state or a wider collectivity, Hegel's exemplifications of his argument also take on this more collective form. Later still, the Hegelian subject gains an increasing awareness that even these collectivities rest upon something which transcends them, at first relating this to further levels of externalization such as art and religion. The significance of these last two forms is that they contain within themselves evidence for a still higher unity, but one which will only be achieved when they in turn are appropriated back into the subject.

Each of these phases continues the process first described. For example, there are periods in which the subject is extremely distant from its own externalization (see Taylor 1975: 77), such as the state of absolute reason, in which, with all the detachment of scientific observation, the world is confronted as a totally separate object. Particular forms of estrangement are exemplified as the distance between master and slave, or humanity and God. A period of tyranny or bondage may lead to a sense of detachment which is purely the negative of the impact of the all-powerful ruler: the attitude of the stoic, who achieves inner calm through withdrawal, may be followed by the increasing doubt of the sceptic, which may in turn lead to the extreme sense of distance termed the state of the unhappy consciousness. Such extreme externalizations lead to important changes in the subject when the external is finally reappropriated and reconciled. For example, the state of the unhappy consciousness is necessary for the achievement of reason, and the state of extreme objectivity is necessary for the transformation from mind into spirit with its new ethical concerns. Thus, the greater the distance between the subject and its object, the more profound the consequences of the subject's final realization of the truth that the external object, whether in the form of nature, morality or religion is in fact the result of the subject's own projections onto history according to whatever level of intellectual understanding it has reached at that stage, and is therefore an integral part of itself. It is the understanding of this truth which allows the subject to incorporate that which had hitherto been external, since the realization that something is in fact one's own creation is an essential part of one's ability to reincorporate it. Overall, a simple generality which is merely abstract has become a set of complex concepts which subsumes the particularity and individuality of things.

This story might be considered infinite, but Hegel in fact draws it to a dramatic and very final conclusion when that transcendence which is developed in the forms of art and religion is itself appropriated, and the subject becomes unified with these images to develop the final state of absolute knowledge. This concept can be understood only when the story is related to its grounding in history and philosophy.

Although at first identified with generic individuals the sequence by which the Hegelian subject transforms itself in the creation of the world is quickly subsumed under the development of society, since individuality can only arise in explicit opposition to the generic mind of the other. For similar reasons, history as the overall development of humanity is plotted as a dialectic in which humanity externalizes itself in a series of increasingly sophisticated and differentiated institutions which are still, however, only partial embodiments of Geist. This suggests less that Hegel intended the Phenomenology to be read as a history of the world than that history provides the main exemplification for the trajectory of this subject. Thus, particular periods of history are used to represent specific stages in the sequence he describes. The Englightenment is developed as an example of the extreme distancing of reason from the world; while the Greek polis is cited earlier on as a case of extreme, if relatively unconscious, identification  one in which the realization of the individual was to be identified with the realization of the state, a principle which is most familiar from Socrates' reaction to his own forthcoming execution (Plato 1984; Taylor 1979: 90). In a sense, then, human history can be understood not only as the basic metaphor for, but also as evidence for the actuality of, the sequence being described. The French Revolution, understood as an historically pre-emptive attempt at immediate absolute liberty, which then brought about the terror, followed by Napoleon's reimposition of a strong state, was a key historical source of Hegel's ideas (Hyppolite 1969: 35-69). Many of Hegel's examples of possible states and governments are also taken from developments taking place in Prussia at that time.

Another equally important factor which always mediates in the incorporation of history, is that of philosophy. The Phenomenology may therefore also be associated with the history of that discipline. The Hegelian subject must be provided with a mechanism which will allow the externality of history to be appropriated into its own development towards universal rationality. An integral part of that movement is the subject's ability increasingly to comprehend the process in which it is engaged. The means by which the subject attains self-understanding is identified with the practice of philosophy; at different stages, forms of philosophy such as scepticism and stoicism may exemplify a 'distancing' which is necessary prior to some dvancement in understanding Hegel 77: At each sage the understanding the subject needs in order to appropriate increasingly complex externalized forms must itself be increasingly sophisticated. Thus, the history of philosophy is one in which an ever more profound grasp is achieved not only of the relationship between subject and object, but also of the nature of the subject and the extent and these processes.

This leads back to the concept of absolute knowledge, a culmination of the whole trajectory which derives not from any new externalization, any new content as it were, but from a new stage of awareness, a final move that permits a total realization and understanding of the process. Once the Hegelian subject understands not only the manner in which it externalizes itself and reappropriates this externalization, but also the trajectory of its own increasing understanding of this process, it comes to the final realization that it is itself the product of this process, an understanding it can achieve only by going through every stage of this developing awareness culminating in a profound comprehension of the rational nature of the world.

This final stage, which is a kind of meta-philosophy comprehending the very existence and purpose of philosophy as an equally constitutive part of the process of the subjects self-realization, is signified, of course, in the very act of writing the Phenomenology, in which for the first time the entire process is described, delineated and presented for further comprehension. This act of writing, then, represents the final bringing together of all experience, (that is, all history up to that point) and simultaneously all understanding (that is, all philosophy up to that point) in the now totally developed Hegelian subject. Hegel understood the sequence of the Phenomenology itself to have solved various philosophical conundrums.

At this stage, any latent differentiation between the subject and its object is eliminated; while, by the example of this elaborate sequence of processes, Hegel has demonstrated the enormous gulf between knowledge understood as an immediate relationship with the sensual, and what he saw as the true nature of human appropriation of the world. In Hegel's view, real knowledge of the object is possible only when we come to understand that it is the result of our own activity, and when we become aware of the ultimate rationality of the world which provides for the possibility of objects of knowledge. Hegel thus believed that he had solved the fundamental problems of ontology and epistemology.

This concept of absolute knowledge must also be understood against a background of another kind, whereby philosophy is seen as a guide to social pathologies identified as peculiar to the modern age. From his earliest writings onwards, Hegel had been working on the problem of how society, which appeared so fragmented, might achieve the kind of coherent totality which had been the goal of the whole Romantic tradition in philosophy and the arts. Through absolute knowledge, Hegel hoped that he had uncovered a means by which humanity might come to feel at home in a world whose order it could both understand and become identified with.

For present purposes, the most important aspect of the Phenonemology is the nature of the trajectory itsel, which possesses several significant attributes. A irst characteristic is that the process works from a universal which is first externalized into the particular and then reincorporated, eschewing all immediate relationships between subject and object. Hegel therefore rejects 'natural' humanity and knowledge as static, and insists that humanity only achieves selfrealization through the long and painful trajectory he describes. As Hyppolite noted, 'To cultivate oneself is not to develop harmoniously, as in organic growth, but to oppose oneself and rediscover oneself through a rending and a separation' (1974: 385).

This brings us to another major feature of the trajectory, which is its intrinsically dynamic quality. The externalized object is always treated by Hegel as being one stage beyond the subject, and the subject is always dissatisfied with the stage it has reached. In a sense, the subject is defined in such a way that it is never complete, prior to the stage oabsolute knowlee, and it is this feeling o unfulfiment which provides the motive force for further development. This dynamism is important not only because it dispenses with any need to find an external causation for its own trajectory, but also because of what it implies about the relationship between subject, object and process. In the Hegelian system these are inseparable; the subject, the object and their variable relationship are products of the process itself. There is never a prior subject, because the subject is always constituted by the process of absorbing its own object. Similarly, the object, if understood as human cultural development, must reflect the capacity of humanity at any given stage of history. Hegel has thereby resolved the central problem of subject—object relations not merely in the utopian state of absolute knowledge, but in the much more important refusal to allow for the existence of either subject or object except in a mutally constitutive relationship which itself exists only as part of the process of its own realization. In effect, the structure of the work is itself responsible for one of its crucial attainments, that of a genuine non-reductionism.

## Objectification

It is from this trajectory and its structure that the concept of objectification will be abstracted. There is a severe problem here, in that the German term now translated as objectification (Vergegenstandlichung) is not used in any of the 765 pages of the Phenomenology (Arthur 1982: 19). The term Hegel uses (Entäuerung) today tends to be translated as alienation. According to Arthur, this confusion arises because the connotations of the term alienation have sedimented further since the time of Marx, making it impossible to understand the term in the way Hegel orginally intended. Indeed, the English word alienation would today, outside of academic philosophy, have negative connotations quite contrary to the positive meaning of self-alienation, as an essential moment of estrangement necessary for historical development, intended by Hegel. This was a problem for Marx, who clearly felt that the word objectification would have been a more appropriate term for Hegel to have used (see next chapter and Arthur 1982).

In this volume, the term objectification will be used to describe a dual process by means of which a subject externalizes itself in a creative act of differentation, and in turn reappropriates this externalization through an act which Hegel terms sublation (aufhebung). This act eliminates the separation of the subject from its creation but does not eliminate this creation itself; instead, the creation is used to enrich and develop the subject, which then transcends its earlier state. The use of this term is therefore an attempt to retain the original positive connotations of Hegel's view of moments of self-alienation and sublation as a progressive process. The particular aspect of this process emphasized by the term objectification lies in the act of externalization which may be considered as synonymous with the creation of particular form. It should be noted that this is not quite the same as 'the giving of form to something', since that something could not exist prior to its own form. Equally there is no (cultural) subject prior to the process of objectification through which it is created although the activity must take place in history and through the material and intellectual media given by that historical period. Form may be related to any medium of human externalization, either internal such as dreaming and sensation, or external such as words, institutions, objects and actions. As such, the term also incorporates Hegel's understanding of externalization as creating a movement through particularization towards further generalization.

The main reason for considering the Phenomenology in some detail is that it provides a foundation for a non-reductionist and dynamic subject-object relation. In this book, the process of objectification will be used to consider the relationship between on the one hand a subject which is human (and usually collective), and on the other, first, culture as all external form, and later, the artefact as the humanly produced material object. This is obviously a drastic narrowing of Hegel's own perspective. He addresses the specific question of external material form in terms of two areas: the object of art and the concept of property. With respect to the first of these, he claims:

The universal need for art, that is to say, is man's rational need to lift the inner and outer world into his spiritual consciousness as an object in which he recognizes again his own self. The need for this spiritual freedom he satisfies, on the one hand, within by making what is within him explicit to himself, but correspondingly by giving outward reality to this his explicit sel and thus in the duplication of himself by bringing what is in him into st  knowledge orhimsel nd others (Hegel 1975: 312).

The problem of the second area, that of property, is addressed most fully in a later work, the Philosophy of Right, where it is deeply ebe u lat  ular of government (Hegel 1952: 4057; see also Marx 1975: 16680). Property is presented as a key element in the anchoring of will in the world. Although analysed within the general framework of the legitimacy of law, Hegel's expressivist conception asserts a relationship to property through work rather than contract (Ryan 1984: 12034). Underlying this, however, are statements about the general relationship between people and things and the necessary embodiment of wil in objects, as is evident in the following quotations:

A person must translate his freedom into an external sphere in order to exist as Idea . . . What is immediately different from free mind is that which, both for mind and in itself, is the external pure and simple, a thing, something not free, not personal, without rights (1952: 40).

One aspect of property is that it is an existent as an external thga  th  operty xi  he extal ts and is connected with their necessity and contingency. But it is also an existent as an embodiment of the will, and from this point of view the 'other' for which it exists can only be the will of another person (ibid: 57).

There are parallels between the discussions of these otherwise disparate topics of art and property which make clear the implications of the overall scheme for this particular aspect of culture, indicating both the relevance of material form as a media for externalization and the dependence of this relationship upon its social and economic context. Hegel is not, however, concerned, as this present book will be primarily concerned, with the nature of the cultural artefact as by definition already engaged in a reciprocal relation with some particular humanity. Furthermore, apart from in the Aesthetics, Hegel does not give much prominence to the particular form which is the vehicle for the objectification process (Rosen 1982: chapter 5).

If the term objectification is used to describe this relationship within which the subject and object are created, it establishes first that this relationship is always a process, and secondly that the process is always progressive. Objectification is the very essence of the development of the subject, and without it there can be no progression; as Hegel says, 'The negative of the object, or its self-supersession, has a positive meaning for self-consciousness' (Hegel 1977: 479). This is because, for Hegel, all such stages are steps towards an understanding of the rationality of the actual. It follows that, within the process of objectification, the act of externalization and separation is also understood as a wholly positive moment, because without it we cannot have the reciprocal moment of sublation. It may be noted, however, that if objectification is truncated, so that we have an act of externalization without subsequent sublation, then that act of externalization would have to be seen as negative, a situation of rupture, representing a loss to the subject, rather than a gain.

This term objectification will be the central tenet of the theory of material culture to be developed here. The source of the concept is properly Hegel, since although similar ideas preceded him and were his source, and although aspects such as the nature of subjectivity have been elaborated since, there are elements of the Phenomenology, including its dynamism and its refusal of reductionism, which have perhaps never been developed as fully either previously or since. Hegel's ideas have their roots in theological discussions in which God was considered to be objectifying himself in Jesus or humanity, a process which is reversed in the secularization of theology found in Fichte and Hegel. Fichte, however, retained something of the philosophical tradition of dualism, since his objectification is an ideal used as a model for judging history, rather than as a means of characterizing the relationship between people and history itself. In Hegel, this dualism is eliminated through the experience represented by history and its comprehension in philosophy, which are themselves the actual evidence for, and forms taken by, the process of objectification.

## Abstracting from Hegel

Having described the concept of objectification both in terms of the general scheme of the Phenomenology and in itself, the remainder of this chapter is an attempt to abstract the notion from this Hegelian context, since the further use of the term will not be intended to connote the philosophical premises held by Hegel. At the same time, however, certain characteristics of the process, namely its dynamic, positive and non-reductionist implications, are to be retained.

The potential for such a separation is evident from the writings of Marx, who clearly believed that, through the translation of some features and the rejection o others, he would be able to retain those elements of Hegel's project which he saw as positive, but ground them in a quite different set of terms oriented towards an alternative set of goals. Marx, however, used many aspects of Hegel's ideas, such as the l atu e ale e   istl eity, a the al Rnl  otality wh il utilized here.

To take on board only one aspect of Hegel's work, that is objectification, as a model attempt to resolve the subject-object dualism, while ignoring other major elements such as the dialectic as a form of logic and absolute knowledge is, in a sense, to reduce Hegel from an idealist to a positivist. Nevertheless, there are clearly good precedents for such an extraction. In addition to Marx, a variety of later writers have been influenced by, and have in turn privileged, particular aspects of Hegel's work. For example, French writers such as Merleau-Ponty and Sartre were inspired by the section on the master-slave relationship (curiously ignored by Marx, see Arthur 1983; Schmidt 1985: 6372) to refine both the concept of the 'other' and the content of subjectivity. Some philosophers have concentrated on the logic and system of the Phenomenology (e.g. Inwood 1983: 259348); others have stressed its contemporary relevance (e.g. Plant 1973; Taylor 1979). Many other aspects of the work, ranging from the discussions of phrenology (Hegel 1977: 185210) to its primitivism (Inwood 1983: 43), now appear dated.

An alternative grounding for this abstracted concept of objectification lies firstly in the relationship between human subjects and material objects, and secondly in the specific instance of objects in the modern world of mass consumption. In relation to material objects, with which, as has already been shown, Hegel was only tangentially concerned, there are several ways in which these ideas might be utilized. It is generally agreed that for Hegel the form of progressive knowledge necessary for the process of objectification is not some private introspection, but a public social activity or intersubjective pursuit such as philosophy (Plant 1973: 88). Scruton (1979: 24450), attempting to apply this observation to a particular form of self-consciousness, derived from its externalization into object form through creative work. Many other writers, such as Schutz and Mead, also use this tradition of thought to examine the nature of such consciousness - that is, of subjectivity and intersubjectivity — and to a lesser degree the implications of the physicality of objects e. McCarthy 1984). Here, however, it will not be assumed that externality necessarily implies individual consciousness or selfconsciousness (see chapter 6), in the sense of a language-based, potentially explicit and reflexive process of thought. Even, however, if it never impinges upon consciousness, the creation of cultural form always acts as a transformation in the environment through which society as subject becomes itself, and must always be understood as a socially reflexive praxis.

It is clear that the concept of objectification as derived from Hegel implies that there is no prior subject or object, but rather a process of mutual construction which always takes place in history. This can be expressed within the larger framework of the Phenomenology:

The idea goes out into nature and at first is lost there. That is, it has not yet an adequate expression, and hence there is a division and separation within this world, and between the world and Spirit which cannot recognize itself. The development of an adequate embodiment, and hence the return of Spirit to itself is the work of history (Taylor 1979: 143).

The Phenomenology, however, adds more than simply this degree of historical relativism to an intended analysis. One of the properties which distinguishes Hegel from the Romantics is his emphasis upon a sequence of increasing differentiation and sophistication. For the Romantics, whether they looked to art, or to a mythical past or future, the drive was towards a sense of holism, of homogeneity, simplicity and source. That is, they were seeking something to counter that sense of differentiation, complexity and fragmentation which was the historical basis for their unease. By contrast, Hegel, although influenced by the contemporary Romantics and evoking a sense of totality which is quite magnificent, never does so at the expense of variety. Kolakowski notes that 'his purpose was to interpret the universe as entirely meaningful without sacrificing its iversiy 8: The pr jeation, a nially a process of externalization, is then always also a process of differentiation, and at each phase this differentiation becomes more complex, since the process is accretative, developing on the basis of what precedes it. It is almost the first fully developed epigenetic structure; that is, each stage depends upon and retains elements of, but s upr,hoe whic av    that ther overall process of growing complexity.

In modern parlance, such a characterization would render Hegel, if not a modernist, then someone who has captured the most peculiar and most important single element of modern culture, the ever increasing dive towards structural differentiation. Although Hegel himself is much more concerned with the struggle towards a more rational and explicit relationship with nature than with the rise of complexity per se, he directly^confronts many classic features of modern society, such as the growth of individual subjectivity tied to an increasingly objective stance taken to the external world. From his earliest writings onwards (Plant 1973: 76123), he sought to reconcile the progressive tendencies evident in the new fulfilment of human potential rendered possible by contemporary developments with the fact that these same changes appeared to lead to a greater fragmentation of both society and the individual. A number of these themes as they are taken up by Simmel are discussed in chapter 5 in such a way as to connect Hegel's main interests to a specific concern with the increasingly material and concrete form taken by cultural expression ever since the time of Hegel. They provide the basis for the application in chapter 10 of the concept of objectification to the problem of mass consumption.

Primarily then, objectification is intended as the foundation for a theory of culture. Indeed, if culture is defined as the externalization of society in history, through which it is enabled to embody and thus reproduce itself, objectification and culture may be defined with respect to one another. The use of the term objectification then asserts the necessity for a particular kind of relationship between human development and external form. This relationship is never static, but always a process of becoming which cannot be reduced to either of its two component parts: subject and object. The action of externalization and sublation is always constitutive, never merely reflective, and is therefore not a process of signification.

This means that a theory of culture can have no independent subject, as neither individuals nor societies can be considered as its originators, since both are inseparable from culture itself and are as much constituted by culture as constituting it. This process is inherently dynamic; the relation between subject and object is never static. Objectification is therefore an assertion of the non-reductionist nature of culture as process. In so far as the subject is society (usually in a collective sense), the term objectification asserts the necessarily positive nature of this process, which must in turn imply some stance concerning the progressive potential of social being, and the possibilities of this being realized in the concrete determinacy of being. Finally, the term objectification may be used to assert that the process of culture, which must always include self-alienation as a stage in its accomplishment, is thereby inherently contradictory. Since this contradiction is embodied in the particular vehicle or form taken by culture, and since modern culture has become increasingly a material culture, this materiality may play an ever more important part in the constitution of this contradiction.
