> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Marx: Objectification as Rupture

## Marx's Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts

The development of Marx's thought and the manner in which it grew out of his critique of Hegel became much clearer to scholars when an early study, written at the age of twenty-six and variously called the '1844', 'Paris' or 'Economic and Philosophical' manuscripts, was published in 1932. Most of this chapter will be concerned with exploring how the concept of objectification has been affected by the particular way in which Marx translated the Phenomenology into his own terms, as revealed in these manuscripts. It will be suggested, however, that this is of concern not because of the central importance of the manuscripts themselves, but because, with respect to the notion of objectification, the transformation revealed there provides the basis for a set of ideas which continue in an equally strong vein, if not so explicitly, throughout Marx's work and in many of the writings of later Marxists. Since the term objectification is today used mainly within Marxist discussion, and since it is almost always used with respect to Marx's rather than Hegel's position, this transformation, its vanagesn probles mus nsidery cnty attempt to utilize the concept of objectification.

The chapter will begin with a summary of the argument set out in the manuscripts and a discussion of the relationship between Marx's terms and those used by Hegel. A brief account will be given of the degree of continuity between these early ideas and those found in Capital.This will be followed by a critical account of two aspects of Marx's work: first the transformation which took place in the concept of objectification itself, and secondly the problematic relationship between production and consumption apparent in his writings.

The final section of the manuscripts (Marx 1975: 379-400) consists of an explicit critique of Hegel's work, but even in the absence of this, it would be clear from the manner in which Marx develops his terms that Hegel is the direct source for the structure within which his ideas are first expressed, and that concepts such as communism, the proletariat and Marx's particular view of labour emerge as much from his translation  Heel s from  bstraction from he social world around him.

In a sense, many of Marx's concepts and ideas are generated from one simple act of transformation. For Hegel, the subject develops through a process of objectification in which the external is first created through an act of positing, then reincorporated in an act of sublation. For Marx also, the subject creates an external world, in the mirror of which the human species is realized; but for him this is an act of physical creation by flesh-and-blood people utilizing the material world of nature, and not merely what he derides as mere intellectual positing in Hegel. Marx's transformation of Hegel's concept arose from his conviction, derived in particular from the work of Feuerbach, that Hegel's analysis was an abstracted metaphysic which could not address directly those real issues of society and history to which Marx was committed. For Marx, theory should not relate to the world merely at the level of abstract philosophy, but should be engaged in its transformation. As a result of this view, he developed the concept of praxis, which sought to locate resolutions of philosophical problems in the material world of social relations. Thus, philosophical conundrums concerning the nature of ontology could be solved, but only through the physical transformation of the social world. For this reason, Marx was to abandon the kind of abstracted discussion found in the manuscripts, and thereafter to consider these issues in a more concrete and embedded form.

The translation of the act of positing by the subject into an act of physical transformation is quite explicit in the manuscripts, and Marx's arguments may therefore be presented through direct quotation. The inconsistent use made of the term objectification in these quotations should be noted; this will be discussed in a later section. The order of the manuscripts reflects the major sources of Marx's ideas. The first section is a critique of the logic of the political economy, and the problems of wages, prices, labour and capital - a critique which was to achieve a much greater level of sophistication and detail in later writings. In the next section, concerning estranged labour, Marx explores those ideas which he will use to break open the traditional debates on the political economy. Here we find Marx's first translation of Hegel into his own terms. The third section provides a more direct confrontation with Hegel, and analysis of Hegel's terminology as used in the Phenomenology.

Marx begins with the relationship between humanity and the external world of nature, without which nothing can be created. The labour. His argument is that

It is therefore in his fashioning of the objective that man really proves himself to be a species-being. Such production is his active species-life. Through it nature appears as his work and his reality. The object of labour is therefore the objectification of the species-life of man: for man reproduces himself not only intellectually, in his consciousness, but actively and actually, and he can therefore contemplate himself in a world he has created (Marx 1975: 329).

Like Hegel, Marx believes that the creation of this objective external world is necessary for the species to come to understand itself as human, but Marx stresses the physical aspects of this creative process. As he states succinctly, The practical creation of an objective world, the fashioning of inorganic nature, is proof that man is a conscious species-being' (ibid: 3289).

It is clear from these quotations that culture has a central place in Marx's ontology, but that it is culture seen from the perspective of the act of production. The second major transformation of Hegel is Marx's argument that the process of objectification as outlined by Hegel cannot take place in present circumstances, because production does not occur freely, but under conditions of estrangement. This possibly is clear in Hegel, who argued that at certain periods the subject does not recognize the 'other' as the result of its own creation, and feels distant from it. Marx makes a direct translation: Just like Hegel's spirit in the period of unhappy consciousness, generic man does not recognise himself in his own objectification' (Taylor 1979: 144).

Under conditions of estrangement, people cannot develop through objectification, because the process itself is ruptured. The external is created under conditions which ensure that the producer is unable to utilize culture as an instrument for self-realization:

The jcthat lbur ouces,  pruct sn o to it as something alien, as a power independent of the producer. The product of labour is labour embodied and made material in an object, it is an objectifiction of labour (Marx 1975: 324)

Tn i. The fit is this separation o the producer from the productso labour, most evident in the factory-and-market distribution system. The second is estrangement at the location of the work process, which ul  nu conditions with which the producer is unable to have any positive association. The third are the legal and political forces which rest upon the notions of private property, through which nature itself, the proper object of productive investment, becomes rather an alienated and foreign domain for the worker. In this sequence, the condition of alienated labour is the prior force from which structures such as private property arise (Arthur 1980).

By applying to this argument the logic of the Phenomenology, the roots of many of the familiar terms of Marx's writings may be uncovered. Although Hegel's concepts are translated into a new field, many of the relationships between the terms are retained (Freenberg 1981: 48). Capitalism is here portrayed not simply as an example of estrangement, but as the most pronounced cleavage between people and their work ever encountered in the history of the species. Following Hegel, Marx presents such extreme separation as an index of the extreme nature of the resolution which must follow. This suggests that we are on the threshold of Hegel's concept of the final resolution embodied in absolute knowledge, an idea enshrined in the concept of communism. Thus in Marx's words,

Communism is the positive suppression of private property as human self-estrangement, and hence the true appropriation of the human essence through and for man; it is the complete restoration of man to himself as a social, i.e. human being (Marx 1975: 348).

As with absolute knowledge, communism must know what it is in order to achieve self-realization: The entire movement of history is therefore both the actual act of creation of communism - the birth of its empirical existence - and, for its thinking consciousness, the comprehended and known movement of its becoming' (Marx 1975: 8 It must also resolve all those dualisms which absolute knowledge addressed:

It is the genuine resolution of the conflict between man and nature, and between man and man, the true resolution of the conflict between existence and being, between objectification and self-affirmation, between freedom and necessity, between individual and species. It is the solution of the riddle of history and knows itself to be that solution (Marx 1975: 348).

It is clear from these quotations just how much of Hegel's conception of the process of development underlies the origins of Marx's ideas.

Although more developed in Marx's later writings, the notion of class has already begun to emerge as the social force whose tensions have always been responsible for the dynamic movement. Hegel's process of externalization, and the dialectic of his Logic, become in turn the dialectic embodied in emerging contradictions between social forces (created by their very relationship to each other as classes), and a series of historical, always partial, resolutions. These resolutions give rise, under new conditions of production, to ever greater contradictions which are, in turn, precursors of the contradiction of modern capitalism. Hegel's sequence is never seen in terms of a process of individual socialization or development, but rather as social history with generic humanity as its subject. The dynamic quality of Hegel's tensions between the subject and its other becomes dependent upon the struggle of different social groups at each phase of human existence to seize their own products for the purposes of their realization as a class. Hegel's idea that the subject exists only in terms of the stage it has reached in the process itself is translated into the belief that the possibilities immanent in the forces of production vary with each historical phase. Overall, Marx perceives the same basic totality, in which the meaning of each part of social life or each social group derives essentially from its position in this historic and historical progression.

Marx's debt to Hegel is more or less acknowledged in the effort spent upon explicit critique, both in the latter part of these manuscripts and in other early writings (e.g. Marx 1975: 57-198, 24357). This implies that Marx perceived Hegel in ambivalent terms, crediting his brilliant ability to foresee the structure of history and ontology, but criticizing his inability to grasp the actual nature of his own subject. The point is discussed in more detail by Lukács, who argued in a somewhat unlikely vein that Hegel was only able to evisage the finality of the ultimate resolution because he lived in conditions of nascent capitalism, and had sufficient perspicacity to 'see' in mythic form the fall of capitalism even before it had properly arisen (Lukács: 1975). Marx's concern to differentiate himself from Hegel has at times been overemphasized, and it is worth noting that, for example, discussion of the nature and implications of labour as physical and not just intellectual production is central to a number of Hegel's social and political writings (Plant 1977: 1035).

Before proceeding to the key question of the fate of Hegel's concept ofobjectiication, it is important to examine briefly the significance o the manuscripts themselves. These are early works whose main interest today lies in their contribution to the much more developed later writings of Marx. Indeed, the influential writings of Althusser and his followers argued for a radical break between these 'humanist' beginnings and the true science of the later Marx. Much depends upon how particular 'lines of descent' are constructed for tracing the development of Marx's ideas. For example, the argument that estrangement should be understood as a radical separation of producer and product, involving the inability of the producer to comprehend the nature of that process to which they are subject may be held to be an element within the critique of ideology, resurfacing in Capital as the 'fetishism of commodities', in which again social groups are held to be unable to comprehend that commodities which they see as alien are actually of their own production (Althusser 1969: 230). This would, however, represent an extreme narrowing of the initial concerns. There are many alternative links, including, for example, those with the later writings on exploitation and property (Torrance: 1977).

It is also possible to argue that the central foundation of Marx's later work is none other than a grounding of these early concerns in particular issues. The concept of fetishism, and of the expropriation of surplus value in Capital, both ultiately derive from the labour theory of value which when used as the foundation for a critique of exchange value, provides the core of that work as a social theory (Rubin 1972). This theory also represents a convenient position from which to measure the degree of continuity between Marx's early and later writings. The central argument in the manuscripts is that the critical power of Hegel's work may be realized only in terms of an ontology based upon the physical creation, through labour, of culture as the constitutive mirror of humanity. That is to say, it is an argument whose central feature is the privileging of the act of production. This is precisely the aim of the labour theory of value as employed in Capital. Here, Hegel's self-constitutive activity has been incorporated within a model of the political economy for which labour is the sole source of value. Given the difference in the time of composition of the two works, the central idea is remarkably consistent. It is this assertion of the category 'value', held to be synonymous with the product of human labour, which, when embedded within the complex workings of the political economy, provides the foundation for virtually all the central arguments in Capital. Although Capital is far more developed in its economic analysis, the relationship between the basic terms used, the notions of class, communism and estrangement, are carried through from the manuscripts to the end of Marx's life.

## Marx's Transformation of Objectification

Examination of the different uses made of the term objectification in a at an early stage, there was a clear distinction between his understanding of the concept, and Hegel's idea of self-alienation.

The first example (Marx 1975: 329, p. 36 above) is the closest to Hegel's own conception, in that production is to be understood as the site for the objectification of the species-life of humanity, and for its self-creation as a social force. In the other examples, however, (ibid: 324, p. 36 above, and 348, p. 37 above) it appears that, by means of a process of recontextualization, the term comes to mean something quite different. In these quotations, Marx has separated off the moments of externalization from the promise of sublation, such that objectification tends to obstruct, rather than to promote, the subjects development. Here, objectification is held to be in conflict with self-affirmation: it is the process of the product's becoming alien to its maker. In these latter quotations, the term objectification becomes understood as the production of an object form, which by the very fact of its objectivity appears to lend itself to the process of estrangement; that is, to appear as strange. The objectification of labour here becomes the making of an object which is distanced from the subject's act of self-creation, and through which elements of the subject, by being in a sense petrified, come to appear in an object form that is opposed to humanity as a social formation. In its estrangement from its own product, the subject loses an element of its humanity and itself becomes more of an object. These ideas were to become more explicit in Marx's later writings on the nature of the commodity.

Hegel's brilliance lies in the way he turned concepts such as self-alienation, which might have appeared as negative and threatening processes, into assertions about the positive, though contradictory, nature of those forces necessary to social development. For Hegel, an objective existence of increasingly concrete, explicit, differentiated and particular form, which is nevertheless subsumable in more complex abstractions and totalities, is precisely what the subject gains through self-alienation. Marx retains something of this possibility, which is the source of his continued faith in the significance of the act of production itsel as the site of self-realization. As production comes to stand for the process of externalization, however, the term objectification appears to lose the sense in which it is an embodiment of this very process, and its meaning becomes overshadowed by the prevailing sense of estrangement specific to the conditions of the time. Under these conditions, all the negative connotations of alienation and objectification come back with a vengeance. Objectification is turned to as a more literal, in some ways less profound, rendering, in which the implidconnotation of giving concrete form tosomething og   is   peg rat th al e development of human social and material relations; it has now been transformed into a theory of rupture.

The essential difference between the two writers is that Hegel demand the unty  ll prosses o jctification, icorpoat realization and alienation; he denies that they can be separated into positive and negative connotations. This also means that Hegel's notion of totalities is tempered by its constant tension with processes of fragmentation and abstraction. Marx, by contrast, has a mission to detail, as never before, the intensity of the negative forces enshrinein modern life. For him, therefore the possibilities of positive development have to be completely separated from the actuality of these negative conditions, and this means that he must return to the older dichotomy of a Romanticized positive and a highly empirical negative, and also to the idea of a pre-cultural 'authentic' social relation. Although this was done for the very good reason that immediate involvement was essential to Marx's thesis, the manner in which it was carried out creates severe problems. The difference, then, is that Hegel posits the necessity of contradiction to his understanding of ontology, while Marx increasingly renders objectification as alienation resulting from a particular and contemporary historical condition.

Was Marx correct in implying that Hegel should have separated off a notion of objectification from that of alienation, and that he failed sufficiently to recognize that this alienation was the dominant feature of a specific historical period which had begun during his lifetime? I do not wish to defend, in general, Hegel's idealist and philosophical system against Marx's brilliant social critique, but with respect to this particular issue there is some confusion. In asserting that alienation is a consequence of that objectification characteristic of capitalism, Marx inverts Hegel's idea that objectification as a process is only made possible through self-alienation. Giddens endorses this inversion, suggesting that 'Many secondary writers have failed to grasp this essential distinction between objectification and alienation' (1971: 11n).

A more sustained analysis is provided by Arthur (1982), who illustrates the complexity of the issues involved, a complexity increased by the absence of the term objectification in Hegel's Phenomenology. Arthur provides a detailed, balanced and illuminating account of the use of the relevant terms by both authors (see also Torrance: 1977). He shows that Marx was quite aware of the positive nature of Hegel's conception of objectification (which in some respects he adopted in the idea of the unrealized potentiality in both production and communism). Marx also makes quite reasonable criticisms of Hegel's idealism and abstraction, setting them against the urgent demands of praxis. He finds fault with Hegel's inability to perceive objectification except as linked to alienation, which Marx (unlike Hegel) sees as tantamount to estrangement. His central criticism, however, is that Hegel failed to acknowledge the true historical nature of alienation, which is to be identified with the particular nature of capitalism. At the end of this analysis, Arthur follows and confirms the logic of Marx's critique of Hegel, asserting that 'Hegel's tragedy is that, though objectification and alienation are conceptually distinct and are so distinguished brilliantly by Marx, Hegel cannot grasp this possibility, for it depends upon an historical potential beyond the limits of his bourgeois standpoint' (1982: 22). One of the implications of these comments is that Marx did indeed make a clear distinction between alienation and objectification. In his writings, however, as illustrated above, Marx often uses the term objectification to provide precisely the same feeling of estrangement as that implied by the term alienation; both become elements of his theory of rupture, and they are therefore not so much differentiated as equally transformed into expressions of the negative situation under capitalism.

In effect, Marx criticized Hegel on the grounds that he unduly conflated the concepts of obectification and alienation, and proposed a mystificatory rendition of historical processes. In opposition to this criticism, I wish to argue that Hegel's terms imply a deeper contradiction, one that is lost in the writings of Marx. Hegel's concept of objectification implies the necessity of certain processes which may be identified with the creation of culture in general. He describes externalization as the process of objective form arising both through fragmentation into the particular, and resolution through abstraction, both of which are essential to modernity. These processes are simultaneously positive and negative, and this very simultaneity is an intrinsic part of the process. This seems deliberate and clear in Hegel, a profound assertion of a 'tragic' but intrinsic feature of all human culture. That it represents a contradiction which is inescapable and must be lived will be further argued in chapter 5, through an examination of the writings of Simmel.

He proby

By ojectifying himself in culture, the State and huma labour in general, man at the same time alienates himself, becomes other than himself, and discovers in this objectification an insurmountable degeneration which he must nevertheless try to overcome. This is a tension inseparable from existence, and it is Hegel's merit to have drawn attention to it and to have preserved it in the very centre of human self-consciousness. On the other hand, one of the great difficulties of Marxism is its claim to overcome this tension in the more or less near future and hastily to attribute it to a particular phase of history. It is surely an oversimplification to imagine that this tension can be reduced to a super-structure of the economic world. It is undeniable that the capitalist system represents a form of human alienation, but it can hardly be the only one (Hyppolite 1969: 87).

This point applies equally to the notion of objectification as cultural process. It allows us to retain the original Hegelian proposition that self-alienation is an inescapable part of a positive process, but one which has an intrinsically contradictory nature. One unfortunate result of Marx's transformation of objectification is that the positive 'other' tends increasingly to be absorbed into the abstraction of communism, which is asserted as the antithesis of capitalism. The concept of communism retains the most Romantic aspect of Hegel's belief in totalities, in the unmediated form of absolute knowledge, instead of being grounded in the immediate problems of living through modernity, a problem which has become even more significant with the development of socialism.

The term objectification is used and understood today mainly in the tradition of Western Marxism, a tradition which incorporates the work not only of Marx himself, but also of the various influential writers who have developed Marx's ideas since his death. In general, these writers have extended Marx's treatment of the term along the same trajectory so that objectification has become increasingly divorced from its original positive context, and is now understood as a negative expression of 'petrification' as the major instrument of estrangement. In relation to later Marxism, however, the term cannot be considered in isolation, since, depending upon the particular form of Marxist theory concerned, it has become firmly enmeshed in the use of three further terms: alienation, fetishism and reification. Each of these three terms has different connotations, and these in turn vary from writer to writer. The examples of their use given here represent only the briefest summary of their extremely complex and diverse semantic trajectories.

The notion of alienation is closest to the concept of estrangement, since estrangement represents the conditions under which alienation takes place. Alienation may then follow the model developed by the early Marx as the distance between the workers' potential relationship with their products and their actual circumstances. Since the time of

Marx, this term has developed its own complex literature within the wider tradition of Marxism (e.g. Dupré 1983: 1557; Joachim 1979; Ollman 1971; Schmidt 1971); but it is also connected to a more general discussion, in which it has come increasingly to stand for a kind of 'modern human condition' characterized by a sense of loss of authentic or proper identity. As such, it provides links with general concepts of anomie, as used by Durkheim, and the writings of existentialists, especially the later work of Sartre (Chiodi 1976; Sartre 1976).

The concept of fetishism is the only one of these three terms which is still used today to refer back to Marx's original argument in Capital, although it may be bracketed as the final recasting of Marx's early writings about the separation of the workers from their products (though see Rubin 1972, for an argument as to its greater prominence). The idea is that such are the conditions of the modern world that the vast array of the products of labour cannot be understood as such by the worker, who confronts them in a different sphere, where they appear to be the result of other forces. This is in part a consequence of contemporary representations of the political economy, which portray commodities as a result of the abstract working of capital itself, and dispense with the social relations which created them. In a sense, fetishism allows for a critical analysis of the field of consumption, but one in which the entire sphere tends to be treated as merely a mode of 'false' representation, consequent upon other spheres.

The third term, reification, is the most problematic, since it is best identified with certain Marxists rather than Marx himself. It can, however, be related to Marx's understanding of Feuerbach's critique of religion. The central tenet of reification is that human beings create objects in order to understand themselves, but become separated from this positing and perceive the object as having an external reality and an origin separate from themselves. Such products thereby develop an autonomy, deflecting society's attention from critical self-awareness to this mysterious other. Feuerbach saw the notion of 'God' as an instance o such an inversion. In Marx's later critique, the language o ecomics in which apital is given a life of its own may again v as an example of reification.

This term has, however, become closely bound to the trajectory of thought which develops through the work of Lukacs, whose influential essay Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat (1971) is itself modelled on the argument of Hegel's Phenomenology. Lukács argued that the proletariat, as the most estranged social fraction, was thereby best positioned to become the instrument of the ultimate resolution of societal contradiction in communism. Following Lukács, the term is further developed by several members of the Frankfurt School, particularly Adorno (Rose 1978: 2751). The writers of this tradition effectively expanded their analysis into a more general cultural critique, examining those forms of knowledge and authority which pertain to things as rational, technical and positivistic. Because of its relevance to contemporary anti-welfare politics, this critique of technocratic control and efficiency continues to exert considerable influence today, through the works, for example, of Marcuse (1964) and Habermas (1970). From such writings has developed the modern Marxist concept of objectification which views as equally problematic the epistemological notion of objectivity and the representational problem of object form.

These ideas will be referred back to, throughout the present work, since they are still the major means of identifying the process of rupture as they exist in modern society. The writings on ideology and reification help us to understand how and why certain groups retain control over the very means of objectification, while others are forced to attempt to objectify themselves through forms which are produced in the image of other people's interests. Through this argument, the term objectification will be used in chapter 9 to refine the concept of ideology as a form of contemporary social critique. In so far as the degree of control over the media of objectification is an outcome of conflicts generated by the social relations of production, the original Marxist structure within which these ideas have been developed continues to be relevant today.

One casualty of these trends, however, has been the original Hegelian conception of objectification. The positive side of Hegel's process is absorbed into the Romantic notion of communism, where all is resolved and where objectification is possible. Meanwhile, all social analysis takes place under conditions of such extreme rupture that this is all that can be concentrated upon, and objectification and rupture gradually come to be seen as identical. An interpretation of the term objectification as meaning the creation of an object form is compatible with many of the major and familiar elements of the modern critique of capitalism. These include the idea that social relations have been reduced to the appearance of object relations, with the human subject becoming increasingly debased as merely the object of extreme bureaucratic and institutionalized forces. This is closely related to the positivist idea of an objectified epistemology which eliminates any consideration of subjective elements from the criteria of knowledge; and finally, through reification, to the idea that modern concepts are themselves an array of false objects with false attributes and false subjects which have to be, in modern parlance, 'deconstructed

## Production and Consumption

A final element of this brief critique is most relevant to the third section of the present work, which will attempt to provide an approach to modern consumption. The specific point that Marx privileged the area of production and largely ignored the contribution of consumption has been most forcibly argued by the French social theorist Baudrillard in The Mirror of Production (1975) and further developed in For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign 1981).

Baudrillard takes as the major point of contention the central pillar of Marx's work, the emphasis on labour as the site of self-creation whether as an ontological definition of humanity in the early work or as the true source of value in the later work. Baudrillard places Marx in the context of other Victorian British thinkers faced with the trauma of the contemporary industrial revolution, arguing that, in effect, Marx was establishing one version of a theme common to conservatives, liberals and radicals alike, an ideological commitment beneath the level of overt political confrontation. This was the idea of work as the only true means of human self-creation, with the corollary that the factories of the day were producing every kind of product but were reducing their workers to the level of machines. Such ideas, which have only recently been conclusively challenged by theories resulting from the rise of feminist studies and the decline of manufacturing, were central to the beliefs of influential writers such as Ruskin. One of their consequences was the comparative devaluing of all forms of human action and social relation outside the workplace (with the exception of art).

It is this which allows Baudrillard to recast Marx as a conservative Victorian true to his time, and to suggest that Marx 'made a radical critique of political economy, but still in the form of political economy' (1975: 50). Baudrillard's technique is to examine the processes of signification employed by Marx, which remain unquestioned in his writings (for an argument that Baudrillard thereby misrepresents Marx in several respects see Preteceille and Terrail 1985: 29-34). In common with a number of recent theorists, Baudrillard argues that the process of signification may result in the emergence of an apparently unproblematic and natural signified wc ally hn     x then, the transformation of nature is the occasion of its objectification as a productive force under the sign of utility (the same is true ultanusyu labour v b h x value and the equivalence through time of abstract social labour, labour and production constitute an abstraction, a reduction, and an extraordinary rationalization in relation to the richness of symbolic exchange' (1975: 45).

The concept of production, then, is one which stresses the utilitarian value of work; that is to say, we create our identity through socially useful labour, which is the transformation of nature to fulfil our needs. This notion of utility expresses another central Victorian value, which Marx extends through an additional symbolic process represented by the term 'use value'; that is, an assertion of that value pertaining to goods by virtue of the genuine human needs to which they relate. The products of labour are assumed to be aimed at the fulfilment of fundamental, often biological, needs, which lie at the basis of the materiality of humanity. In this respect, Marx proposes an essentialist notion of humanity in opposition to which Baudrillard, using the results of social anthropology, asserts the cultural and historical source of perceived needs (see also Sahlins 1976a: 12665, 20521; Steadman 1979).

Baudrillard models his critique of use value on Marx's own analysis of exchange value (1981: 130-42). Just as the latter had become a 'given' of economic theory which mystified its actual basis in social relations, so also use value is mystified by this assumption of basic biological needs. Baudrillard claims that Marx developed his own 'Robinson Crusoe myth' of the type he challenged in other economists, seeing utility as a place of direct, isolated relations between person and nature. For Marx, there is no social relation which corresponds to use value. Just as Marx reduces exchange from fetished form to a signifier of social relations, he fails to recognize that utility has precisely the same mystificatory quality. Marx thereby, in effect, reproduces and extends the fetishistic character of utility. Even more than exchange, the notion of function lends itself to an underscoring of the essentialist view of human nature which prevents its exposure as a cultural construction (see also chapter 7 pp. 11518 below).

The reason for employing Baudrillard's work as the basis for this critique is that he is a key figure in pointing out, not only these limitations of Marx, but also their consequences for aspects of modern society which have thereby escaped the kind of radical analysis to which they might otherwise have been exposed. Marx is often accused of devaluing cultural relations at the expense of economics as the source of social relations. But Baudrillard more specifically focuses on the devaluing of consumption as opposed to production. His argument is that these privileged signifieds of use value and productive labour have blinded us to the oppressive nature of the play of commodities as signs; and he implies that the belief that commodities ought to signify 'real' values prevents us from appreciating the oppressive mechanisms by which commodities actually fail to operate in any conventional significatory role, referring only to themselves and appropriating all other aspects of social relations to themselves through consumption. This last, complex, (and dubious) point will be returned to in the third section of this book, which deals directly with the nature of modern consumption.

The accusation that Marx devalued consumption seems to be supported by his own work, since the only place where he provides an explicit analysis of consumption is in the introduction to the Grundrisse (Marx 1973: 83-111). In terms of the present perspective, however, this is a highly unsatisfactory section, in which Marx asserts the totality of the relations of consumption, distribution and production. Although this represents the content of the section, in essence it is an attempt to deal with aspects of Hegel's logic and the very concept of totality. These relations and terms are used to exemplify the workings of this logic, rather than in a serious attempt to deal with consumption as an actual human practice. Although Marx appears to assert the mutuality of production and consumption, through which production demands consumption of its subject, and consumption demands production of its object, Sahlins demonstrates that what starts as reciprocity quickly develops into hierarchy. Because there is no independent consideration of the cultural construction of consumption, this area becomes merely the logical outcome of the sphere of production, that moment which completes the production cycle, reducing practices back to practical reason (Sahlins 1976a: 153-57). This suggests, then, that the labour theory of value and the concept of use value are jointly responsible for a conservative attitude to the place of work and utilitarian practices as the 'proper' sites of human self-creation, and a concomitant failure to examine cultural and consumption activities as creative of social relations.

The charge that Marx de-emphasized consumption is closely connected to the earlier criticism of his general account of objectification. Marx's intention was clearly oriented towards a holistic understanding  history. Oserving the degree t which Hegel appeared to permit ideas of both consciousness and culture as form to become independent  th social and economic base, Marx attempted the task of regrounding these ideas within their larger historical context, through the development of a concept of social relations which spoke of a larger totality in which the two elements could not be separated. It has been argued in this chapter that, despite protestations to the contrary (e.g. Dupré 1983: 17), Marx unfortunately submerged elements of culture he had intended merely to integrate. When taken as a redressing of a balance, the emphasis on material culture and mass consumption in the present work need not therefore contribute to a new autonomy or fetishism, but may serve the continued aim of this tradition in academic analysis which attempts to refuse the tendency towards autonomy of both subject and object.

To conclude, the writings of Marx and the later Marxists are so firmly entrenched in our cultural and academic structures that they provide part of the common backdrop to any analysis proposed. The intention of the criticisms made in this chapter is not to reduce their achievements, but to draw attention to those emphases which were lost, and to examine the consequences of that loss. This provides for both an analysis of consumption which is no longer merely relegated to an outcome of conflicts centered elsewhere, and a use of the concept of objectification to understand the nature of contradictions and strategies which cannot entirely be reduced to the nature of capitalism as the conditions of rupture.
