> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Munn: Objectification as Culture

## Introduction

This and the following chapter are intended as complementary expositions of an approach to culture as objectification. An attempt to assess the implications of the concept of modernity will be begun in chapter 5, but if the concept of objectification is not to be reduced solely to a critique of capitalism, as has been the tendency since Marx, anthropology may provide a context for its elucidation which is relatively free from considerations of industrialization and modernity.

Social anthropology has commonly been employed as a kind of ruse, by means of which, through the exploration of different 'non-modern' societies, a degree of relativism is introduced which permits a more sophisticated analysis of complex societies. For this purpose, societies such as the Australian aboriginals, who produce and use a minimum of material artefacts, have often been invoked in contrast to industrial cultures. Such a procedure has rightly come into question because the original basis for the development of such polarities, the idea that the simpler the technology of the society the more it represents some pristine or primitive condition, as implied by various evolutionary perspectives, is unacceptable. It is, however, possible to accept the fundamental equality between societies, and acknowledge their contemporaneity, while continuing to recognize the significance of the distinction with respect to industrialization and material produce, in which case the original project of social comparison accomplished by anthropological investigation retains its validity and interest.

Even in anthropology, however, the analysis of objectification cannot be easily divorced from the tendency to construct simple dichotomies of capitalist as against pre-capitalist society, rather than to engage in a more general comparative discussion. This is clear if one considers the foundations for anthropological discussion of the subject-object relation. The statement which continues to dominate

debates on this within the discipline was written by Mauss in 1925 in his book The Gi:it s cear that in Mao cusom this bond cea by things is in fact a bond between perns, snce the thing itsel is a is to give a part of oneself (1954: 10).

In this statement, Mauss attempts an interpretation of the Maori concept of hau, which he sees as referring to the inalienable essence of an object which is retained throughout the exchanges to which it is u.Th ct party ps why e i   thi a, in effect, obligates the recipient to provide a reciprocal gift. Mauss further claims that such exchanges not only implicate the persons who participate in them, and the labour by which the artefact is created, but also all those moral, religious, economic and juridical norms which in 'gift' societies are inseparable, making the gift what Mauss terms a 'total' social phenomenon (1954: 76).

Within the book, Mauss makes clear that the concept of the gift, though replete with empirical ethnographic examples, is also conceived of in direct contrast to the market, in which the exchange of things is entirely separable from the attributes of the persons who participate in that exchange. The sale of the commodity is a completed action with no further implications, while the gift is part of an infinite cycle of exchange. The gift thereby provides a focus for a whole series of dichotomies between the segmentary, holistic, communal tribal society, and the fragmented, hierarchical, individualistic societies of capitalism. Thus, although Mauss's prime positive models were drawn from friendly or mutual societies, rather than communism, the irreducible link between object and person is still conceived within the Romantic vein of a world lost and therefore re-established only as critique (1954: 6381).

These arguments have spawned a large literature and a core tradition within later social anthroplogy. Some have chosen to dispute the fidelity of Mauss's interpretation of the hau to the original Maori text, variously suggesting that it refers rather to the profit or increase gained by the object which must be repaid, to several different concepts which Mauss conflated, or to an aspect of witchcraft (e.g. Firth 1957; Gathercole 1978; Hanson and Hanson 1983: 65-6, 41721; Sahlins 1974: 14962). The link between object and person has also been more directly related to questions of inalienability (especially with respect to the concept of kitomu in the Kula, see Damon 1980; 1983: 323-7; Gregory 1983: 108-9; Weiner 1983: 148-9; 1985). Most importantly, Sahlins recognized that The Gift in effect makes the claim that exchange constitutes a 'social contract' approximating to the formation of a society, but without necessitating the establishment of a state (1972: 16583). In a sense, this abstraction is taken to its extreme by Lévi-Strauss, who in his key work on kinship, The Elementary Structures of Kinship, dismisses the native text as mere rationalization and interprets exchange as an initial constituting of society in terms of abstract structural relationships (Lévi-Strauss 1969; also 1982 for direct commentary on Mauss).

The dichotomous tendencies in The Gift are contradicted by other aspects of research in this area. Mauss recognized that gift-exchange may develop extremely aggressive and competitive features, as in the Potlatch of the North-West American Indians, and cannot be separated from personal interest. Another prime example of the gift is the kula ring, which will be discussed further below; this is practised alongside gimwali, which is classic market exchange abstracted from the participants and characterized by haggling and business acumen. Bourdieu (1977: 3-9) has criticized those who interpreted gift reciprocity as a series of abstract rules, noting that given the lapse of time between gift and counter-gift, there enter various considerations of strategy; in view of this, he follows Mauss in refusing to confuse the appearance of disinterestedness with its actuality. If the gift has commodity-like aspects, Appadurai, following a series of anthropological critiques of overly economistic representations of capitalist societies, has recently argued that the commodity also has gift-like aspects, which have been neglected as disciplines such as economics remove the commodity from the cultural context within which it operates (1986: 1213).

These discussions may lead us to address the nature of objectification. In a recent article, Weiner returned to the original Maussian interpretation of the hau and re-emphasized the question of inalienability, noting how the object in its own history may encapsulate the ancestral links which define a person's social being. She argues that the primary value of inalienability, however, is expressed through the power these objects have to define who one is in an historical sense. The object acts as a vehicle for bringing past time into the present' (1985: 210). In the anthropological discussion of gift and commodity in general, however, the degree to which the person is implicated in the thing, and the thing has qualities of the person, is subordinated to the question of how society is constituted in and through exchange. The work of Nancy Munn, to which the remainder of this chapter is devoted, is therefore unusual in that he has sought to icorpora the analysis of exchange within a more general understanding of the nature of culture as practice (e.g. Munn 1986: 268).

Although Munn is not among the dozen or so anthropologists with respect to the nature of objectification her studies are of major significance. In her most recent work, Munn has become involved with one of the core examples of this tradition, that is the kula, but having come to the study of exchange following previous work in the analysis of visual representation, it will become evident that she understands exchange in elation to oectfication and ot eely the other way around.

In this case it is the corpus of studies rather than a single article which will be used, since these reveal certain significant trends. Her earlier writings are concerned with the nature of culture mainly within a single social group, and show the influence of structuralism and symbolic studies; while in some of her latest work these concerns are supplemented by ideas from the writings of Mauss and Marx, phenomenology, and a concern with the relationships between different societies.

## Objectification Within One Society

The particular group studied in Munn's major early work (1973a), which focused upon the nature of iconography, are called the Walbiri and live in the desert region of central Australia north-west of the tourist landmark of Ayers Rock. Today, the Australian aboriginal, as known from anthropological studies, is almost entirely associated with such small nomadic bands adapted to extreme desertic conditions. It should be noted, however, that the native peoples of Australia appear to have been no more inclined to such extreme natural deprivation than peoples elsewhere, and the major concentration of the population had always been along the rich coasts and tropical areas, until the decimation of aboriginals by Europeans forced them into the most inhospitable regions.

The Walbiri appear to have most of the commonly found attributes of extant aboriginal desert society. There is a strong sexual division of labour: women gather and men hunt. The largely nomadic existence is centered on the water holes, or dry creeks where water can be found by digging temporary wells. At such places, camps are set up consisting of little more than hearths and wind breaks made of bark or corrugated iron sheets. The patterns of kinship are complex, but in brief there are shallow genealogies with lines usually represented by only seven to twelve males, based upon patrilineal 'lodges'. These male-based divisions are cross-cut by other social divisions, some of which are female-centered. Men are often polygamous and control junior males. There is no evidence, however, of the hierarchy of segmentary lineages familiar from African ethnography.

The pattern of social relations is only comprehensible when it is related to the land. Without many portable artefacts, the Walbiri have developed a detailed and profound relationship with their environment. Groups are defined in terms of territories with specific rights to areas and sometimes to foods. This relationship is not an immediate one, however, but always represented as a relationship between people and the ancestral figures of the dreamtime (the period during which the world was created). It is these ancestral figures who are held to have created the landscape with all the features visible today; each is accredited with a track across the landscape showing, for example, where an ancestral marsupial mouse raised up hills, dug the water holes with a digging stick or its penis, and created depressions in the ground with its footprints.

Claims of relations to land are always made in terms knowlege of the ancestors who created it; and the recognized rights of a social group are always rights to the representation of a particular ancestor. Thus, it may be granted that a certain patrilineal lodge possesses the rights to represent a wallaby ancestor, while another group has the rights to oversee the first group in carrying out any such representations, which usually take place during a number of life-cycle ceremonies such as the initiation of young males, or funerals. These rights mark the groups' relationship to each other and their exclusive rights to part of the track of a given ancestor, and thereby to territory. Since rights derive from knowledge about ancestors, the major ceremonies for initiating a young male into maturity consist largely of the enactment of these representations, thereby revealing to the initiate that knowledge, often of an otherwise secret nature, which marks the authority of the group over the land. The possession of this knowledge is seen as essential for formal inclusion of the individual into the controlling group.

Most of Munn's book (1973a) is a detailed account of the iconography involved in a number of systems of representation, the main emphasis being on the nature of symbolism and iconicity, topics which became especially prominent with the rise of structuralism and semiotic analysis. Although there remains a significant degree of interest within anthropology in the nature of symbolic systems, the precise details are less relevant to the present work, and will only be briefly summarized. One contrast which emerges strongly from the study of the Walbiri is between the forms of representation carried out by women, and those carried out, usually in the absence of women, by men. A typical woman's system of representation are the sand stories, simple patterns made in the sand by women who may be recounting some everyday event in the camp, or telling a generalized story about the ancestors. The designs are very simple and can be reduced to some thirteen basic elements, such as circles, lines, U-shapes, wavy lines ec. Since many of these elements may relate to more than one potential referent, they are usually used in combinations which allow the actual meaning to be clarified. For example, a U-hap k obees al g next to it appears to represent a spear, which is normally associated with males.

The stories follow a certain pattern. First, the ancestors emerge from a hole in the ground; they then engage in various activities, and the story ends with their disappearance down another hole in the ground. The activities described in the sand stories are simple and familiar, such as gathering foods, dancing or sharing food. Munn notes the origins of the design elements, which may be 'discovered' by individuals in their dreams. The originator may be either the user or her husband, but these designs are not individually owned, and once discovered will be shared. The stories are either set in the ancestral dreamtime, or related to the events of the day, but in the former case the conception is generic, and no single ancestor or particular locality is designated.

There are several contrasts between these and the forms of representation mainly used by men. While the women's stories revolve around the campsite, the men's are usually based on the tracking of animals across the landscape. In this case, it is the specific named ancestors who are being tracked, and with respect to particular localities. The designs are inherited directly from the dreamtime and are individually owned. In a sense, then, the women's forms of representation are displaced by their lack of immediacy and specific referent, and the mediation of the dream. This becomes important when considered in terms of the different rights held by the two sexes. The capacity to represent is itself the mark of one's rights. Although women have their own ritual activities, it is during the secluded male rituals that the identity of the key ancestors is learnt and the more abstracted representations are translated, so that the initiate is aware of which particular ancestor is being referred to.

Munn concentrates on the analysis of one particular ceremony known as the Banba, which forms part of male intiation rites. During this ceremony, which consists mainly of preparations, since the actual enactment of the ancestor's movements is a fairly brief dramatization, Munn shows that several transformations are being conducted. The central change represented by the ritual is the transference of the young male from an agnatically related lodge (i.e. a female-centred kinship set) to the male patrilodge of which he will from now on be a full membér. The enactment can also be understood from analysis of the symbolism to be the appropriation by the males of the female procreative power, in the sense both of the female-controlled biological power of reproduction being subsumed by the male cultural control over social reproduction, and also of the male dominance of inventive and procreative forms. This appropriation takes place in part through the transformation of an internal personal relationship with the ancestors into an externalized 'institutionalized' relationship (1973a: 216).

Such an appropriation of female reproductive power, which may be related to the wider concept of the relationship of nature to culture, here suggests that the difference in degrees of access to means of representation may itself be efficacious in ensuring the continued dominance of certain groups in a given society. This is a theme which will be returned to. It would ony be a valid point, however, i it could be shown that these forms of representation were themselves major elements in social transformations. This is suggested by Munn in one of her earlier articles (on the Murngin people), in which she criticizes the implications of those studies of symbolism which concentrate on the place of symbols as 'units in conceptual systems, or as ritual condensation points for complex social meanings' (Munn 1969: 178), and argues instead that these systems of representation possess a more integral and efficacious quality. What emerges from these works is a sense of how the individual projects out in representation, but in so doing comes to understand personal experience in relation to a set of media, most particularly the landscape, which contrast people as social beings having certain relationships. The internalization of these externalizations thereby creates the individual's being in relation to age, gender, social group and other familiar social categories.

This constitutive quality of Walbiri iconography is further enhanced as a possible model of objectification by the extent to which the Walbiri themselves appear to have developed a parallel concept. This emerges from Munn's analysis of the structure of certain myths known to the Walbiri and the nearby Pitjantjatjara (Munn 1971). These myths reveal that the process by means of which the ancestral beings created the landscape was one of self-alienation and externalization. In the myths, the ancestors undergo several forms of transformation from sentient beings into objects. First, the ancestors may transform the whole of their body into some visual feature such as a rock outcrop (metamorphosis); secondly, they may leave their imprint upon the ground through the impression of a part of their body, such as a footprint (imprinting); and thirdly, they may take out from within their body an object which then is transformed into a natural feature of the land (externalization) (Munn 1971: 142) Although the ancestors are perpetually in motion, they may lave behind a number of such permanent and static signs of their transformations.

Munn notes the ways in which the ancestors may create such object forms: 'In their view, the ancestor first dreams his objectifications while sleeping in the camp. In effect, he visualizes his travels  the country, the songs and everything he makes - inside his head before they are externalised. Objectifications are conceived of as external projections of an interior vision: they come from the inner self of the ancestor into the outer world' (Munn 1971: 145). Munn's article provides detailed material on precisely how the people conceive of these subject-object relations, which, for the Walbiri, may\_ be compared with the experience of the individual in dreaming. This highly subjective experience is in fact linked to a relatively direct experience of the world of the ancestors, and thereby the objective world of history, which is a distanced, generalized place of appraisal with respect to the events of everyday life. This process of externalization and interiorization may be repeated in a more controlled vein through ceremonial and ritual activities (Munn 1973a: 11718).

From the study of myths it is clear that the Walbiri's view of this process is quite different from that of most psychologists (for examples see chapter 6). The Walbiri can envisage the individual as the creator of a new external form, such as a new design derived from dreaming. But, unlike psychologists, who concentrate on the individual process of self-development through objectification, it is clear to the Walbiri that such processes occur in a world which is already created as a culture by history. This sense of the historical foundation of culture, and therefore of any attempt to comprehend social activities, is a central tenet of most anthropological studies; and it is at least implicit in the discipline that it arises in part because it is closer to the self-conception of most non-industrial small-scale societies with their central concern for 'custom'.

For the Walbiri, the human process of objectification is the mirror image of the process enacted by the ancestors. The ancestral beings did not go about this process of objectification systematically or deliberately; it was merely an integral part of their being to create the world: 'In sum, ancestral transformation involves a free, untrammelled creativity and 'self-objectification' inherent in the nature of the subject' (Munn 1971: 145). This distinguishes ancestors from humans, who are involved in a process of objectification which must always submit to the prior existence of the world. It also distinguishes the conception of a cosmology in which actions are always re-enactments from the concept of history in the Western sense of 'origins'.

Munn makes clear that this is not merely intellectual positing. The ancestral forces have created the details of the landscape which are crucial to the self-identification of the extant social groups. These are in effect land rights, whose proper inheritance is established through the mythic form. Munn relates this process of inheritance to the problems of generation mentioned above. The transformations of the ancestors are linked in a number of images with ideas of birth and fecundity. The appropriation by males of female reproductive power can thereby be represented in the appropriation of a set of objects (boards). The child starts as an objectification of woman (represented by ancestral female spirits), but, through the appropriation of the boards, may be separated from the continued presence of woman which is inherent in it through its origins in birth (1971: 1556).

In the study of the Walbiri, the particular and privileged medium of objectification is the landscape. In a sense, the surface of the land becomes the surface upon which the process is enacted. The ancestors originally emerge through a hole in the ground, enact their activities and descend into the ground through another hole. The systems of representation always use designs based upon the impression made in the ground: thus, a tree is represented by a circle, a person sitting on the ground by a U-shape, an animal by the tracks of its feet, tail or penis dragging along the ground. As Munn says, 'The country is the fundamental object system external to the conscious subject within wch  hall cu a : 143). The image may also follow for dreaming; in dreams, one goes beyond the surface of the world into the time in which the world was created, the dreamtime, and then emerges from that back into the world of lived experience.

Clearly, this is an example of reification. The moral order and the social order of the society are understood only as they are mapped out onto a cultural landscape which is 'naturalized' by being mapped in turn onto the natural features of the geographical landscape. The immediacy of this medium for a people living by hunting and gathering, and thereby dependent upon the location of water holes and other such natural features, will be evident. As a medium of objectification, the properties of the landscape become of central importance; it provides the permanence, the authority, and the massivity which can legitimate the social world. When seen in relation to the Walbiri, however, the concept of reification need not necessarily have to be understood as suppression or rupture. It is clear tat e  i relations of hierarchy and power amongst the Walbiri, but this does not mean that these have to be understood as prior causal mechanisms accounting for the process itself. This subtle cosmology should not be reduced to mere functional mystification; rather, the process of objectification which is essential to the creation and reproduction of the group is shown to be always available for manipulation as ideology, so that the means by which the group creates its identity are used to serve particular interests.

The significance of the particular medium of objectification and its potency is also clear in a parallel example used by Lévi-Strauss in his book The Savage Mind (1972: 23744), where he discusses an artefact called the Churinga used by some aboriginal groups. The Churinga are painted elliptical boards which lie hidden or buried in certain caves or crevices. Their location is known to senior males, and they are revealed to juniors as part of an initiation ceremony. At such a time, the junior males are led to the place where the Churinga are kept, and these are excavated or revealed. They are then repaired or repainted if necessary, and returned to the ground or crevice. Lévi-Strauss remarks on our desire to see the authentic and original document even when we have perfectly good copies; in this case, the males are granted the privilege of seeing objects which have actually come from the time of the ancestors. In a world where material objects are scarce, and where those which exist are largely transient, a particular cultural form which is visibly the product of the remote past and is destined for the remote future has a profound implication matched only by the permanence of the landscape itself. Here again, it is the very materiality of the medium of objectification which is important for the process taking place (see also Weiner 1985), a process which reinforces belief in the ancestors as the historical legitimators for the present order of the world. Material forms thus provide a medium for present, transient and particular history to be subsumed under a large experience, in which past and present are absorbed into an infinite dreamtime where cultural order merely re-enacts its own selfcreation.

In portraying another society as an image of totality, in which the cultural environment through which the society is created is understood as a continual self-referential and complex whole, this example employs one of the basic devices which account for the emergence of social anthropology as such. Structuralist techniques commonly emphasize the multivalent character of the symbol; thus for the Walbiri, a circle and line motif may stand, individually or all at once, for sexual intercourse and thereby other aspects of sexual relations, for the relationship of past to present, for the movement of people to and from the camp and of ancestors to and from the landscape, and for many other forms of 'coming out' and 'going in' movements (Munn 1973b). Anthropological anaylsis attempts to reveal how this multivalency is not an element of difference, but something which binds culture together as a kind of fabric, establishing connections which reinforce pervasive cultural images, and rendering the individual fragments or elements of both an iconography and a cosmology meaningless except in relation to a cultural totality. The importance of this emphasis is that it portrays an image of an unfragmented consciousness or culture, which is drawn in opposition to the plethora of characterizations of industrial societies as fragmented or suffering from anomie or alienation. The only exceptions to this are some Marxist anthropologists who focus upon contradictions within pre-capitalist societies. In such studies, anthropologists apply the techniques of micro-scale analysis of the particular and relativistic features of the individual cultural practices, indicating how the fragmentation of people into the variety of material and object forms taken by culture is a medium which constructs the unity of the group, rather than its rifts. This provides a strong contrast with the analysis by Simmel of the same set of relationships in industrial societies (see chapter 5). Both the abstraction of the dreamtime and the particularity of the tracks come back to the people in the form of an understanding of those processes by which they are created as a people.

## Objectification of a Relationship between Societies

In Munn's more recent work, this interest in the individual in relation to society has been extended to an analysis of the relationship between societies. In common with her earlier work, however, is the emphasis upon the manner in which the use of external relations acts to construct the self-image of a society, as a subject in relation to some other'. An article written in 1977 (see also Munn 1983) concerns the construction of canoes on the small island of Gawa to the north-east of New Guinea. Gawa forms part of the kula ring, one of the most extraordinary phenomena for which anthropologists have been called upon to account. The kula ring has traditionally been represented as a rough circle of islands connected by an exchange network around wic culat vauble w helbns veling rection nd eklaces  he ohr.The expeditions by hi group of islanders cross the seas to obtain these valuables and thereby enhance their reputation were made famous by Malinowski in his book, Agoauts the Weten aci. Sce then, e number of books and articles (including Mauss 1954: 19-29) have focused upon the kula from perspectives which emphasize its economic, ritual, political or totalizing implications, in order partly to account for its existence. This work has also clarified the nature of the objects involved (e.g. Campbell 1983; Damon 1980; 1983: 3237; Firth 1983; Scoditti 1983: 26572 on the major kula valuables). Most recent work has shown that earlier accounts were too schematic, and the description given above would have to be refined by considering among other factors, the very different uses made of the valuables in the various island groups within the kula (Leach and Leach eds 1983).

The particular focus of Munn's article is on one small island, Gawa, which provides canoes to be 'launched' out as part of the kula. She describes in some detail the decoration of the canoes and the process of their manufacture, and what emerges most clearly from her account is the sense in which the people 'invest' themselves in the act of creating a cultural object. The process of production and exchange is considered in terms of a series of transformations in spatiotemporal perspectives, through which the canoe moves, symbolically as well as physically, from the island to the outside world. The major factor dominating the production of symbolic form is the eventual fate of the canoe, which will take it far from its actual makers. The symbolism of the decoration is therefore resonant of a whole series of transformations which relate to movements from the society outwards. These include transformations from the heavy, stable tree to the light, seagoing canoe; emphasis on the place of manufacture as a beach which links the territory of the community to the outside; and emphasis on the kinship ties between individuals and between clans and their land (Munn 1977: 412). All of these are 'commented upon' through the canoe decoration; the 'investment' of the subject in the creation of this object is made explicit in, for example, the anthropomorphic symbolism applied to the canoe prowboards, which are ornamented and beautified in a manner analogous with that of the human body (Munn 1977: 47-9). These two processes are connected in that the transformation of the canoe from a static to a mobile entity can be related to its anthropomorphic qualities as animate human over inanimate object.

What is being protrayed here is a concern with the creation of an object in which social relations are implicated, but which will ultimately be delivered up for the use of other people, by being launched into the kula ring. This is an example of the problem of alienation: certain conditions serve to separate the creators from the object of their creative processes. The solution to this problem emerges most clearly in terms of the relationship the people have with the objects for which they exchange their canoes. These objects of exchange, known as kitomu, gain their significance from the social relations which are objectified by the act of exchange, a signficance which therefore could not result entirely from manufacture itself. The canoe is always sent out from the island in a particular direction which helps 'fix' the island in the circuits of kula exchanges. Through various exchange ceremonies, these external exchange systems are articulated with internal exchange networks. The kitomu received in exchange for canoes are closely associated with the self as personal possessions comparable with parts of the body (Munn 1977: 51). These objects are redistributed internally through those same kin networks which were mobilized to produce the canoe.

Munn's conclusions have been taken further by Damon (1980), who sees objects such as these as representative of 'congealed labour', and is thereby able to relate the manipulation of exchange to the appropriation of certain aspects of labour. As with Mauss, the object itself is seen as creative of social relations, through a process by which people self-alienate as an externalization, only to have this aspect of themselves returned in a new form which has accreted to itself the substance of the exchange. Munn suggests that 'the canoe's irreversible journey as an exchange valuable does not alienate it from its producers: all its conversions return to the owning clan' (1977:45). Objectification can here be understood as a process of externalization and sublation which is dependent upon the relationship between two societies, and not merely the internal workings of one. As such, it may assist in the overall problem of accounting for phenomena such as the kula, which appear to place such emphasis upon the movement between societies of objects of no apparent intrinsic worth. In her most recent work Munn incorporates the problem of explaining the kula within a more generalized account of value transformation by means of which the islanders of Gawa, a particular community within the kula,e nabled tact as agents  thewn el-production. She argues that

Gawan socyhs nert iner  unin this inter-island world.On the one hand, the community asserts its own internal viability through the concept of its positive evaluation by these external others, expressed in the Gawan emphasis on fame (butu-), the renown or good name of Gawa in wl   an m   ul hel be produced for Gawans only through an initial externalization process involving the separation of internal elements of Gawa (especially garden crops and canoes, which are the produce of its lan and tre and the tanacion to the ter-sland world (Munn 1986: 6).

Munn begins her account with a quotation from the early Marx, from whom such a perspective is clearly derived (Munn 1977: 39). The relationship to Mauss, and also to phenomenological traditions, is further developed in her latest work (1983, 1986). Here, Munn stresses the dynamic nature of kula activity, in which the participants, in attempting to gain strategic control over the 'roads' by which the valuables pass around the Kula, thereby construct their own place in this spatiotemporal order. As with Mauss, she argues that people and valuables are reciprocally agents of each other's value definition' (1983: 283). This is exemplified in the manner in which both men and valuables gradually attract fame and name through their activity in the Kula, and their ability to persuade or 'move' the mind of other participants (1983: 284).

As with the Walbiri, these modes of development through social self-alienation may be controlled by certain groups to the detriment of others, and indeed recent surveys suggest that the internal impact of the kula is often quite different from that of egalitarian reciprocity. It is rather the means of creating social hierarchy through the display of differential ability in the manipulation of its potential, though these differences take various forms according to their common articulation with internal exchange networks within the particular society. That exchange as a process of objectification may be used for production of hierarchy does not mean, however, that only power relations can account for it.

## Subjectivism and Objectivism in Objectification

Munn's work has here been somewhat artifically separated into two sections, one dealing with intra-societal and the other with intersocietal relations. In practice, the two are obviously closely connected. Malinowski's account of Trobriand men's participation in exchanges with other islands is matched by Weiner's account of the relationship between this, and women's exchanges of valuables within the Trobiands (Weiner 1976; Weiner 1983). Munn, Weiner and other recent writers on the kula (Leach and Leach eds 1983; Munn 1986) have made it very clear that the articulation between these external and internal exchange systems is the key to the construction of individual reputation. The individual-social dichotomy is closely tied to another even stronger dualism in anthropology between subjectivism and objectivism. Munn's work may be used to illustrate how the concept of objectification may aid in the resolution of such artificial extremes.

The core traditions of social anthropology have always shown a prime concern with the collective and historical creation of culture, as opposed to the individual's self-creation. Although the critique of the individual as the privileged subject of analysis has come to prominence in post-structuralist writings in recent years, this is hardly an innovation within social anthropology. All the major traditions of evolutionary studies, functionalism and structuralism eschew the individual subject; indeed, with the work of Lévi-Strauss (1969) and Leach (1954), the individual society has also become suspect as the unit of analysis, with social structure and culture being understood as sets of transformations occurring over a continent, reducing individual social groupings to mere vehicles for their expression. The abiding influence of Durkheim and Marx has created a tendency towards a highly objectivist emphasis in much contemporary anthropology.

A characteristic feature of much of this tradition is that society is always prior to culture; it is social relations and categories which are given form in cultural classifications (Durkheim 1965: 10; Durkheim and Mauss 1963; 87), an emphasis which continues through the work of many contemporary anthropologists (Sahlins 1976a: 10620). What these authors are describing, then, is not properly a process of objectification, since society as subject appears as independent of, and ultimately of a higher ontological status than, the media through which it is expressed. For these writers also, the individual is not considered as either author or recipient of these processes, a legacy of the original stress on the differentiation of anthropology from psychology, and of another of Mauss's influential papers which argues for the relatively unique and recent conception of individualism and the moral and juridicial self in capitalist society (Mauss 1979).

In direct contrast to this tradition is the concern with the subject—object relation as expressed by some versions of the incorporation of phenomenological questions into anthropology. The influential book by Berger and Luckmann (1967) may serve as an example. These authors take on the one hand the work of Schutz, which focused on the manner in which concepts were given a sense of concreteness as everyday reality, and on the ontological implications of this activity. On the other hand, they consider the Durkheimian tradition, which attempts systematically to relate these processes to the nature of the social world. At first glance, the process of externalization, objectivation and internalization (1967: 149 which is clearly modelled on Hegel, would appear to be the same as that being analysed here. But there are some major differences. The term objectivation, which is central to their work, refers to the process by which the subjective idea is externalized in order to be made available both for intersubjective meaning, and also for institutionalization and other processes which fix it in the external world (1967: 49). These in turn may be seen as available for being retrojected back into consciousness in the course of socialization (1967: 78).

For Berger and Luckmann, the crucial relationship is that between objectivity and subjectivity. For them, a dream would be an extreme example of subjective activity, rather than, as here, a mode of objectification. Á further distinction would be in the significance of history to the two approaches. Berger and Luckmann tend to start with the creative subjectivity of the agent, which they recognize as always social in form but with society understood as a constraint, determining the process of externalization through the necessity of intersubjective order; there is much less emphasis upon the historical nature of culture. The question of conscious perception of these processes is also far more important for their definitions than within the mainstream anthropological tradition (Thomason 1982: 130). In contrast, the approach developed here allows for no subject prior to the process of objectification, although it does allow for the historical nature of the media of objectification. Despite the similarity of terminology, then, Berger and Luckmann often appear to affirm the kind of dualism of subject-object relations which the Hegelian tradition is intended to eliminate, although it should be noted that they would make no claim to be faithful to any such tradition.

These opposing traditions share a common difficulty, in that one preserves society as prior, the other subjectivity. Munn's early work commences with a process much like objectivation, where the objective world appears as a kind of constraint upon the free range of subjective creativity (Munn 1969). Although she retains the language of a more phenomenological approach throughout her work, by the time of writing the article on myth, the concern with the individual subject has become part of a study much closer to the notion of objectification as used here (a term which Berger and Luckmann restrict to a still narrower connotation; see 1967: 84). In part, this may be a result of her extensive use of representations by the people she is studying. Concepts such as the dreamtime and practices such as the Kula are not reducible to questions about the relationship between subjectivity and the objective world, but demand a deeper analysis of the representation of culture as history, and the dependence of any concept of the subject upon an understanding of the process of its becoming. This emerges as a gradual change in the emphases to be found in Munn's own writings, though it is not necessarily recognized as such.

At the same time, Munn is able to employ a process of objectification to explore the relationship between individual and society, while rejecting both psychology and subjectivist analysis. She can consider the contribution of the individual agent, while showing how, by this same contributive act, the individual is constructed in culture (contrary to the critique of her work by Dubinskas and Traweek 1984). To quote from the article on myth: 'As a result of this projective process, the material world comes to provide the individual with images or 'fragments' of himself. In the normal personality these 'images' are recognized as being outside the person and separate from him, and yet are experienced as inextricably bound up with him' (1971: 158). The linkage is again manifested in the practices of Gawa where metaphor is used to illustrate the anthropomorphic nature of the externalization of the canoes as a part of the 'body politic' (1977). In both cases we see the externalization of aspects of the subject in acts of self-alienation through which the subject develops further. Since these elements have no independent meaning, they are not really fragments; they are always firmly embedded in the larger totality, which, however, has to be realized in the dynamics of the process of identification itself.

Although strong parallels have been noted between the concept of objectification as abstracted from Hegel's and Munn's writings, clear differences also emerge. Munn as ethnographer separates herself from the philosophical notion of positing, and may thereby more effectively portray an idea of culture which is effectively lived through and experienced as being-in-the-world. The concepts of the Walbiri or Gawa are therefore a praxis rather than a philosophy, and Munn is critical of those anthropologists who study symbolism as an autonomous conceptual sphere. The strongest difference, however, is in the directionality of the process of objectification. Unlike all the models analysed so far, Munn does not provide a developmental sequence; there is no reason to expect that the culture will grow of its own accord towards greater levels of duality between abstraction and particularization.

This has led some to criticize social anthropologists such as Munn forhav  ially nonicv elatiely ass T b epecially where the present incorporation  the people concerned by colonialism and the pressures of modernity, has been screened off in an effort to preserve some anthropological subject as pristine and traditional e.g. Asad 173). There is a danger, however, in thinking that social change can only be understood as being of one, developmental, kind. The subjects of Munn's analysis, the cultures of Melanesia and Australasia, have undoubtedly changed continually during their long period of existence, but there is no reason to assume that they need ever have changed in the direction of greater material complexity without such external pressures. The problem lies more with the current tendency to envisage only a single model of social change, that of modernity.

This does, however, represent a clear contrast with Hegel. It was suggested in chapter 2 that Hegel's model appears so resonant because it captures the articulation between different processes of development. One of these is clearly that which we term modernity. In this respect, a distinction may be made between societies which have not followed this particular developmental line of their own accord, and those which have. As will be suggested in the next chapter, it is quite possible to understand this difference without implying that one culture is more advanced than, and therefore superior to, another. The Walbiri as presented by Munn are not more primitive than we are, and they are our contemporaries, but they are clearly a lot less modern.
