> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Simmel: Objectification as Modernity

## Introduction

The work to be considered in this chapter provides for a temporary completion of the argument concerning the nature of objectification to which the first part of this book has been devoted. It also introduces a brief discussion of material culture, which is the subject of the next section, and provides a bridge with the major subject of the third section, the nature of mass consumption. Simmel's work has been selected on the grounds that I consider it to be the most convincing analysis of modernity consistent with the concept of objectification as outlined here. This is not at first apparent, mainly because of the particular uses to which his work has been put. At one time, he was taken as a founding figure for American sociology of a quite different complexion; while, more recently, interest in his work had developed from an assessment of his considerable influence on Lukács and, through him, to a certain tradition of Western Marxism. Within this tradition, the argument has been that Simmel's The Philosophy of Money provides an important critique of alienation, which, unfortunately, the author perceived as a condition of moernity telinstd ecittribute cpitalism; bu his philosophy is directed back to its proper object, there is much to be learnt from his examples.

In a sense then, the fate of Simmel's work is at present parallel to that of Hegel's, in as much as later authorities have appropriated his ideas and aligned them with a theory of rupture seen as specific to capitalism. In this chapter, I shall argue that Simmel's assertion that his analysis is one of modernity rather than solely of capitalism should be taken seriously, and that the contradictions in modernity which he analysed are not resolvable through Marxist conceptions of a future society, but are dilemmas which have to be investigated as integral aspects of modern life. Indeed, to see them as representing a kind of problem to which some solution might be found is to misunderstand

their nature. Simmel's further contribution, which has been largely ignored, is his explicit account of the quantitative increase of material culture and its effects upon society, concentrating on the area of consumption. In some respects, he is the last major social theorist directly to have confronted this issue in its own terms, despite the fact that this same quantitative rise in material culture has continued, and appears set to continue, at a most extraordinary rate.

It is not, however, the work of Simmel in general which is the subject of this chapter. Much of this work, such as his theory of social forms, which has been seen as one of the foundations of the discipline of sociology, will be ignored. The particular text to be examined is The Philosophy of Money, first published in 1900 (here 1978). It is this work which most clearly follows the Hegelian model, and which is most explicitly concerned with the nature of material culture and modern society. In addition, use will be made of a series of articles concerning the nature of modern culture.

For Simmel, modernity is defined by societies which are highly monetarized, and therefore strongly permeated by high levels of abstraction and quantitative forms, which may also be related to the rise of industrialization. For the purposes of the present work, there will be an emphasis on structural differentiation and the availability of industrial products to the mass population, providing a material rather than an evolutionary legitimation for the exclusion, with respect to issues thought to be specific to modernity, of countries without monetary wealth or the necessary degree of equitable distribution. Such a definition also excludes approaches to modernity and modernism which focus upon an outlook or attitude usually restricted to elite sections of the population such as artists and planners (for example Berman 1983).

## The Philosophy of Money

As Simmel and every subsequent commentator on this work has stressed, The Philosopby of Money is not intended primarily as a treatise on money as an economic form, but as an examination of the increasingly abstract nature of human relations, for which money provides a symbol and an instrument. The construction of the book follows a pattern which appears to be closely modelled upon Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, though not explicitly so. Simmel starts with the original separation which engenders the subject as consciousness, and traces the stages of increasing distance between subject and object. Each stage is characterized by a simultaneous increase in abstraction and particularization, which are held in tension with one another, and each is taken to present greater difficulties for the subject attempting to resolve these into its own development. Simmel implies specific stages of historical or philosophical forms to equate with his material rather less than Hegel, but his text is much richer than that of his predecessor in the wealth of sociological models based upon such a sequence.

The work begins in classic Hegelian style: 'Mental life begins with an undifferentiated state in which the Ego and its objects are not yet distinguished; consciousness is filled with impressions and perceptions while the bearer of these contents has still not detached himself from them' (1978: 63). It is only through the development of subject-object relations that the subject as such comes to be constituted. Subjectivity is not prior to, but is contingent upon, objectivity. The object emphasized by Simmel in grounding these ideas is, significantly, very different from that of Marx. Whereas the subject of Marx's early work should develop through the productive construction of the world, Simmel's examples most often related to the potential provided by the exchange and consumption of goods not of one's own production. The simplest relationship is the sheer pleasure of immediate consumption of an object which offers no resistance. As Simmel notes, in such circumstances we merely 'lose ourselves' in the object, and no consciousness is generated by the relationship. It is only through the creation of a distance between subject and object that consciousness may arise, as the awareness of being a subject, which is already of objectification' 78:.

This distance between the subject and object is considered by Simmel to represent desire. The influence of Kant's aesthetic theory on the forgoing of immediate pleasure is clear and explicit; Simmel states that We desire objects only if they are not immediately given to us for our use and enjoyment; that is, to the extent that they resist our desire' (1978: 66). This first step towards abstraction is complemented by the initial stages of differentiation. Simmel echoes later structuralism in his conception of a nature undifferentiated except through the imposition of human order, which here takes the form of desire as selective preference. The book starts with a statement about the natural equality of all entities (1978: 61), which Simmel, writing in the Romantic mould, perceives as the first primitive imposition of subjective value upon nature. From a generalized application, the subject moves towards reater diferentiation o surrounding objects, and an increasing specificity of desire.

As with Hegel, following the initial creation of subject-object relations i cnciusness, thee riss an ceasing wareness existence of other subjects, and therefore also the possibility of other values and social relations in the world. Any comparison between these is dependent upon the further externalization of these values as objective forms. Exchange therefore appears as the means by which subjective values are overcome, and it thus the essential condition of all human relationships (1978: 82). Here, we move to a further degree of abstraction, since things are no longer of interest for some essence they may possess but for their exchangeable aspects. For Simmel, objectification is the precondition for culture and thus society; but it is mediated by exchange, which, as the expression of the relationship between things and desires, is the source of value. Simmel places exchange at the point at which Hegel constructs society, and this articulates well with a major tradition in anthropological theory, where it is exchange, often viewed in terms of the polarity of gift and commodity, which i seen  cnstitutive o cty el Appadurai 1986; Lévi-Strauss 1969; Sahlins 1974: 165183).

At this stage, the sequence has developed towards what Simmel calls the relativistic world view, which he understands as contributing to certain attitudes to the world which comprehend processes rather than just entities (1978: 101-8). Throughout the work, Simmel is concerned with the relationship between the degree of abstraction here found in human relations, and that found in the emergence of modern scientific enterprise and modes of thought. This represents a clear overlap with the concerns of Weber, although this later aspect of the approach is much more poorly developed by Simmel.

The stage is now set for the introduction of money as the relational element between goods: 'Money is the reification of the general form of existence according to which things derive their significance from their relationship to each other' (1978: 128). Money is not just the result of an increasing capacity for abstraction, but becomes instrumental in supporting this relational view of things. Again, paradoxically, objects are seen as increasingly exchangeable with one another, but also increasingly specific in terms of the particular values assigned to them in the form of prices. In the second chapter of his work, Simmel traces the manner in which coinage as the medium used for money gradually loses any intrinsic value, and becomes exclusively a symbol for all other relationships. This stage is seen as characteristic of other elements of abstraction, such as the growth of intellectual abilities.

Having established the presence of money as pure symbol and medium of abstract and relational thought, Simmel goes on to address several major features of such a state and to show how money may stand as the quintessence of each. He looks first at purpose, which he takes as the basic means by which the subject abstracts itself from, and imposes itself upon, nature. Money acts as pure directed purpose, since there is no other reason for its existence except as a medium through which ends may be accomplished. It is therefore the purest example of a tool: 'The tremendous importance of money for the understanding of the basic motives of life lies in the fact that money embodies and sublimates the practical relation of man to the objects of his will' (1978: 211). Simmel recognizes, however, that this particular variety of means has a tendency to become an end, as with the accumulation of money for its own sake. He investigates some of the resulting attitudes to money, such as that of the miser, for whom, instead of acting as a tool, money becomes a barrier between means and ends; this is also the case with excessive extravagance, where the overcoming of price as a constraint becomes the source and end of action. As money in itself becomes more important, so too does the strategy of asceticism which rejects wealth as its prime mode of expression. Simmel concludes this section of his Philosophy with an argument that money represents the end point of that cultural process which may be described as the reduction of quality to quantity, a line of argument which was to prove particuarly influential in later traditions of Western Marxism.

Simmel asserts that many of the attitudes which surround, and were created through the impact of, money as abstraction are most evident when it has not completely achieved its role in transforming its own social context, and where there are still structures which resist this transformation and hark back to a non-monetarized era. Here in history (but also in many anthropological examples, see Taussig 1977; Worsley 1957), the nature of money and its role in the transformation of social relations is made explicit.

These arguments provide the foundation for Simmel's account of the contradictory nature of modern life. Having pursued a pseudo-Hegelian sequence with an emphasis on the ever increasing abstraction, which leads to an ever more radical separation of subject and object, we are faced with the question of the nature of subject-object relations in this new era. This may be divided into two sections:rst, the problem of the nature of the subject, and secondly, the problem of the nature of the object in relation to that subject. These may be roughly equated with chapters 4 and 6 of Simmel's text respectively.

One of the most common clichés of everyday life is the equation of money nilMone e cmonlyblam plees in human character, attitudes and behaviour. It is this which makes the next section of Simmel's work so difficult to accept, in that it appears to work o deeply aganist the grain of modern consciousness.

Simmel's essential argument is that money is the prerequisite for, and major instrument in, the accomplishment of freedom and potential equality. The strength of his argument is such that it cannot be dismissed as merely a distortion of the formula by which capitalism' is understood as the guarantor of 'bourgeois freedom'.

The argument is easier to appreciate when set against a nonmonetarized society. As represented by anthropologists, such societies often appear to embody the Romantic conception of close social relations within highly communal environments; but what is less often underlined are certain more difficult aspects of the actual experience of living within such conditions. In a close knit society, the sense of personal obligation is overwhelming. Such obligations, usually based upon kinship relations, are highly specific as regards both the actions demanded and the identity of the individual subject to them. That is to say that every individual lives according to a highly structured set of personal obligations which he or she must continually fulfil. This condition is characteristic of societies dominated not only by kinship but also by feudalism or slavery; it is also characteristic of the peasant village. Áll actions seem to be controlled by a sense of propriety or tradition. The constancy of personal obligations may appear, to the outsider, unremitting and intensely claustraphobic. This may also be the case for the participant, either because the cosmologies themselves, which are often contradictory, admit of an alternative, mythical, more individualistic model of freedom, or because that alternative is evident in the nearby cities, where its attractions outweigh the possible negative features.

Money as abstraction is understood by Simmel to be the root of impersonal relations between people. In a monetarized regime, the individual may be under obligation to a far larger range of people than was hitherto possible, through mortages, tax systems and so on; but these obligations are almost entirely anonymous. The personal figure of coercion, such as the bailiff, may be held at bay through the provision of money, which allows for exchange outside of the nexus of personal social relations. The amount of money received for a service rendered is not dependent upon who you are, but upon the abstract relations within which the service is performed, for example as wage labour. Money therefore tends to extend a concept of equality, in so far as the perception of inequality becomes based upon differences in the possession of money, rather than on an essentialist notion of intrinsic differences in persons. The same condition which favours the emergence of equality as an ideal may provide the means for the further refinement and exactitude of inequality. Non-financial reward for services is likely to be of a highly specific, immediate and implicated form; financial recompense, however, may be translated at any time into a large range of goods and alternative services, according to the desire of the recipient. Under these conditions, lack of money becomes equated with lack of freedom.

It must be recalled that money stands here as the symbol of abstraction in human relations. That same abstraction allows for quantitatively based technological rationality, and for science. Monetarization is thereby tied to the rise of industrialization and bureaucracy. It is this whole series of changes which effect the transformation we recognize as modernity. Although these changes are usually the subject of fulminations against wage labour and the evils of rural or urban proletarianization, the conditions of wage labour may prove attractive to villagers and town dwellers, not necessarily because they are duped by promises or pressurized by taxes, but because of the very real specific constraints of nonmonetarized social orders. What commentators often forget in their Romantic imagery of 'traditional' society is the very heavy burden of strong personal and specific obligations. Indeed, one may imagine that in their private lives these same authors may well feel that the visit of the in-laws or attendance at some social function of a distant relative, two of the few reminders of the once overwhelming burden of personal social relations, are curbs upon their own 'freedom'.

In the non-monetarized society, the individual is likely to be tied to activities which are far more tightly constrained by the necessities of daily life. The exception are aristocrats, who are served by a sufficient number of other people to be freed of this daily burden. However, with money, and all the abstractions associated with it, it is not only those who can directly command the labour of others who are free to indulge, if they so wish, in areas outside of productive work, such as education, but also those who wish to use the money from their labour to secure such opportunities. Money, paradoxically, provides the major means of detachment from direct economic involvement, and is the basis of the professions and pure research.

In relation to the politics of his time, Simmel's more detailed arguments often appear confusing. He clearly favours a state which involves itself essentially through monetary transaction rather than direct intervention in other more qualitative spheres of life. He appears progressive in advocating an income tax as the basis of an arrangement by which people might give according to their means and take according to their need, and sees this in terms of the possibilities of socialism, but at the same time he lends himself to a strong laissez-faire interpretation highly restrictive of the involvement of the state (1978: 31518). Money is held to provide the basis for that level of abstraction at which people are regarded as fundamentally equal to one another, bereft for purposes of social construction of their personal characteristics. Money is thus the foundation for ideas such as socialism and equality between the sexes, which, as abstractions, would be literally inconceivable outside of a highly monetarized society. Simmel is, however, highly sceptical of claim that liberalism has achieved equality in education and other such institutions (1978: 439. Much of this is surprisingly consistent with the writings of Marx. Translated as the historical purpose of the bourgeois, Marx saw money as the necessary stripping away of every vestment of the ancien régime, every personal relation of family and society, which would provide the essential foundation for the possibility of communism. In this respect, Marx was a committed a modernist as Simmel (Marx and Engels 1967).

The process which has been described in the development of abstract social relations is also accomplished in the relationship between persons and things. As has been argued throughout this work, the concept of culture is one which assumes the indivisibility of person and forms (that is, with respect to material objects), and of being and having. According to Simmel, possession is not a static state but an activity (1978: 304). Following the same Kantian argument referred to earlier, possession is held to indicate a profound relationship, since its durability goes beyond the pleasure of immediate gratification. Private property, as an institution, effects not a closer relationship between people and objects, as is often thought, but a greater separation than was hitherto possible. It is a means by which a relationship may be maintained with objects which are at the same time always potentially alienable.

Property is central to the relationship of people and things, and, whether this is experienced individually or as a member of a group, it is one of the foundations of modern culture. In the absence of money, property will tend to be highly specific, and the group it may be related to relatively small. Money as abstraction furnishes opportunities for possession, but mediates in this relationship to give rise to some separation between the specificity of being and the specificity of having, since money alone does not determine its further use by its presence, and is entirely ahistorical. Money is thus an extreme expression of the possibilities inherent in property. Once again, it accomplishes the flexibility of abstraction while potentially being translated into the most specific of things and individual demands: 'Money's remarkable achievement is to make possible the most adequate realization and effectiveness of every individual complication through the equalization of the greatest diversity' (1978: 319).

Money as property is therefore most attuned to serving our particular and independent will. In Simmel's view, then, freedom consists, in part, in the articulation of the self in the medium of things.

Marx's own celebration of capitalism is an ironic one, demonstrating its historical necessity, but always presenting it as an instrument of a doomed social formation permeated by the image of proletarian suffering. We find a more genuine reconciliation of the two authors when we turn to Simmel's analysis of exploitation and alienation. The reduction of individual people to a quantitative mass of wage labourers, who are appraised only in terms of their contribution to capital, is clearly dependent upon the abstraction represented by money. The rise of science, and of technological rationality with which it is closely asociated, provides the basis for this reduction of human relations from qualitative to quantitative forms, of which money is the dominant model. Simmel's eloquent rendition of this process led in the work of Lukács and more generally in Western Marxism, to the condemnation of mechanisms such as reification and alienation. As such, Simmel understands the place of abstraction as a process of rupture. The difference, however, between The Philosophy of Money and most of the later works is that in the early book the rupture created through the rise of money is seen to be inseparable as a historical moment from its positive aspects; that is, it is seen as representing freedom and potential equality. What is stressed rather is that the same phenomenon provides the foundation for both historical tendencies.

## The Quantitative Rise in Goods

Simmel differs markedly from Marx — and almost all other commentators on modern society - in that he stresses the relationship between people, the products of industrialization and the monetary economy in terms not only of production, but also of consumption. It is this which he takes as the key to an understanding of contemporary society, and of culture itself. It wil be clear by now that Simmel recognized the necessity of culture for the development of society, and saw the massive increase in material culture as constructive of new developments in the very possibilities of societies. Whether the objects are books, furniture, or cars, individuals are seen by Simmel as increasingly coming into relationship with them, not as producers who fail to recognize their products, but as consumers who have to determine their own development in this world of goods. Simmel's definition of culture is premised upon objectification; he states that 'one of the basic capacities of the spirit is to separate itself from itself to create forms, ideas, values that oppose it, and only in this form to n the process of culture' (168:.

Simmel effectively extends Marx's concept of rupture to account for the inability of modern individuals to recognize themselves in the world of goods. The problem is that the massive increase in objective culture has not been appropriated by the subject in such a way that material goods become the instrument of the subject's selfdevelopment through the sublation of its own projections; instead, the subject confronts the world of material goods as an alien sphere. In short, he sread jectve culture has utstripped the caciy o te ubject  bsor t.Thi is a result  that hicl pocss y which, through new media such as printing, material goods have been created with cumulative effect; as a result of this powerful force for cultural production, the present generation has inherited a vast accretative mass of products in terms of which it is expected to know itself. Simmel uses Marx's writings about fetishism as the basis for a general theory of the negative aspects of modern culture (1968: 42). He notes the self-perpetuating nature of modern mass production: Thus vast supplies of products come into existence which call forth an artificial demand that is senseless from the perspective of the subject's culture' (1968: 43), and argues that just as academic pursuits such as philology and archaeology, which start with certain aims, may develop as methods creating infinite classificatory refinements for their own sake, so people may become the mere instrument of that which they originally developed: 'The infinitely growing supply of objectified spirit places demands upon the subject, creates desires in him, hits him with feelings of individual inadequacy and helplessness, throws him into total relationships from whose impact he cannot withdraw, although he cannot master their particular contents' (1968: 44).

The division of labour facilitated by money leads to extreme differentiation of its products. The subject is now surrounded by a multitude of objects from which only a few can be selected and invested with a sense of self, but Simmel argues that: 'our freedom is crippled if we deal with objects that our ego cannot assimilate' (1978: 462). There are parallels with Durkheim on anomie, who was also much concerned with consumption (Williams 1982: 322342), and with other writers of the period. The subject continues to invest itself in cultural forms, identifying, for example, with sports, cinema, clothing, a political line, or certain relationships; but such is the scale of modern society that the same individual may become absurdly overextended into essentially superficial relationships, none of which augments his or her being, and yet simultaneously, may have nothing at all in common with another overextended individual who has selected entirely different areas of the surrounding culture. Hence the two highly 'cultured' individuals who meet at a party and find they have nothing in common to talk about. Material objects provide immense specificity, but potentially also extreme fragmentation. Having extended the narrow problem posed by Marx, of the separation of the worker and product, to that of the separation of the subject from culture, Simmel does, however, begin with the premise that the subject might develop in relation to forms which are not his or her individual or class product, a proposition which will be explored further in chapter 10.

Thus the two end products of the development of modern culture, its degree of abstraction and its degree of specificity, are the component parts of the sense of alienation in the modern world. Like Hegel, Simmel exemplifies the result with a characterization of certain attitudes to the world. For example, he suggests that cynicism, which starts with philosophical distance and becomes a refusal of all values, is caused by the observation of values being universally reduced to their money equivalance (1978: 225-6.) If money as abstraction engenders this cynical attitude, so the plethora of products and pleasures creates the blasé attitude in which all objects are perceived as dull and unexciting, and only a new stimulation which rises above the others can produce some, usually temporary, interest (1978: 2567).

This argument was later extended with respect to the experience of living in the modern metropolis, which Simmel suggests provides for a massive intensification of stimulation and experience, but which threatens to overwhelm us as objective culture (1950: 40924). This is the key domain of the calculating, rationalist attitude, obsessed with time, which sees other individuals as merely partners in a transaction, rather than individuals in their own right. Even those who do not exemplify the cynical or the blasé attitude tend towards a certain reservation in their social relations which barely conceals an aversion to direct personal contact (1978: 331).

It is this critique of alienation which has been seized upon by some as Simmel's major contribution to modern critical analysis (e.g. Bottomore and Frisby 1978: 1-49; Frisby 1984: Schmidt 1975). It would, however, be just as unfortunate for our understanding of Simmel to be confined to this aspect of his work as it was for his philosophy to be reduced to the simple model of freedom enshrined in an earlier tradition of American sociology. The significance of Simmel's work is that he breaks away from one of the most preominant tedencihe roundinHeel caln:

that  the sugestion that e n separatef the positive e ui .

What Simmel accomplishes is a realization of the inseparability of the positive and negative consequences of these social transformations. For Simmel, contradiction is not merely an istrument for, but an intrc condition of, the dynamic force of history. In short, his argument is that it is the very abstraction which confers the material advantages of modern science, and the social advantages of both modern freedom and equality, which is also responsible for the dilemmas of exploitation and alienation. the central conflict is not, therefore, one between liberalism and equality, which come from the same root, but one emerging from a recognition that both of these entail consequences which may turn against the interests of the subject. It is an integral part of modern culture that it is simply not possible to envisage a model of freedom, including that abstraction needed for the achievement of equality, which would not have as one of its component parts the tendency towards alienation. The prospect of providing variety cannot be dissociated from a sense of swamping the subject in its alternatives. It follows that a society which had removed capitalism, but which nevertheless sought to retain the benefits of science and the flexibility of money, would still be faced with the problems of these intrinsic contradictions of modern life. Capitalism is thus to be opposed for its exploitative practices, rather than its non-utopian form. Equally, a socialism which restricted itself solely to solving the problem of exploitation in the social relations of production, and failed to respond to these contradictions in culture, might find itself far less attractive - to an electorate, for example—than it envisaged. This is not an affirmation of the status quo; there is nothing in Simmel to reduce antipathy to class conflict or economic exploitation. There is, however, a refusal of the Romantic notion of an ultimate resolution of culture. Hegel's use of this Romantic tradition to develop his idealism with respect to the rationality of the actual and his striving for the transcendence of duality do, however, find their parallel in Simmel's highly positive attitude to art, affirming its ability to express and overcome fragmentation.

Simmel emphasizes the paradoxical nature of culture, recognizing the esentially positive process of modernity which has allowed for hitherto unimaginable possibilities; but he is wary of the forces which lead towards reification and autonomy, both of which are inimical to human interests. This inherent contradiction is what Simmel calls the 'tragedy' of culture. As he describes it,

It is the paradox of culture that subjective life which we feel in its continuous stream and which drives itself towards inner perfection cannot by itself reach the perfection of culture. It can become truly cultivated only through forms which have become completely alien and crystallized into self-sufficient independence. The most decisive way of making this point is to say that culture comes into being by a meeting of two elements, neither of which contain culture by itself: the subjective soul and the objective spiritual product (1968: 30).

This is an important point in considering non-modern culture. Culture for Simmel is not constituted by the material world in itself, but exists only as a process of the subject's becoming. To that extent, modernization represents only a potential for development, not necessarily an actual development; inded, form itself, in its stability, may challenge the continuum of lived experience (Arato 1974: 158; compare Giddens on routinization 1984: 61). It was suggested in the last chapter that analysis which tends to deal with the nature of modernity itself is always in danger of leading to assumptions concerning the superiority of certain 'advanced' peoples over others, which are in effect a version of primitivism. This does not follow, however, from Simmel's approach; for him, the Walbiri's intimate relation to the objective forms taken by their social products, and their classifications of the landscape, might well have appeared more 'cultured' than the attitudes of his German contemporaries, who, in spite of having at their disposal the enormous possibilities of mass culture, did not possess the means for assimilating these into the development of person or group. A social group may be deprived by missionaries or a new education system of access to their own historically inherited forms, and a mere glimpse of the possibilities of industrial culture, without the means for appropriating that culture, is hardly an adequate substitute for such a loss. These observations follow from a renition that ojectication is a process, not an y.

There are many limitations to Simmel's analysis, the most fy vly. I, Weber provides an alternative source for a study of the rise of abstraction, the attitudes which relate to it, and the institutions it produced. One of the major weaknesses in Simmel's analysis is a possible interiorization of the radical subject-object dichotomy he is describing, in particular a leaning, on occasion, towards an essntialist given self. Simmel tends towards a Romantic style of analysis which takes for granted a primitive undifferentiated nature, and various latent versions of totality, for example in art and aesthetics as models of utopian, if transient, resolutions. He also tends to construct spurious histories of the world bases on his sequence. On the other hand, Simmel provides an excellent example of the grounding of Helin e  clure  eclly  culue and clearly demonstartes how these ideas may be used in the exploration of the everyday goods of the mass market (e.g. 1957).

## Conclusion

Simmel's work provides a focus for a review of the metamorphosis of the concept of objectification. It may be defined as a constitutive process for the development of some subject in and through the medium of culture, which is the form taken by all social productions. Since this includes all those forms which are conventially termed subjective, it is clear that the distinction between individual and society is only one of the selection of an analytical level, since the two are inseparable. Culture, then, is not to be understood, by the concept of objectivation formulated by Berger and Luckmann, as the necessary externalization of subjective processes onto intersubjective domains where they become institutionalized. Culture is derived as a historical force prior to the extistence of any individual subject, but is only realizable through agency. It is therefore the means by which the individual is socialized as a member of a given society, and is, in turn the form of all individual and social creativity.

Objectification describes the inevitable process by which all expression, conscious or unconscious, social or individual, takes specific form. It is only through the giving of form that something can be conceived of. The term objectification, however, always implies that form is part of a larger process of becoming. When using the term to describe a developmental process, one starts with a relatively undifferentiated and unselfconscious subject such as a baby, or with a society which preserves a relatively high degree of cultural inalienability. Through several stages, the subject moves to an increasing degree of separation which allows on the one hand for the development of greater variability and specificity, and on the other hand for the development of abstraction. These two are always concurrent aspects of the same process, and are always united in a subject's mode of becoming.

These processes are viewed as essentially positive, but as possessing intrinsic dangers, in as much as either specificity or abstraction may develop in such a manner as to be no longer assimilable by the subject through sublation, in which case they become both alien and oppressive. In particular, the subject has to be able to recognize these externalities as intrinsic aspects of itself. Ideology, defined as the control over certain potential media bjectification in ocy by interest groups such that those who externalize themselves on to those media are unable to recognize that section of themselves, is a common historical phenomenon. Even without a conflict in interests, the attempt to encompass a vast specificity of goods, or the abstractions of academia, have their dangers to the group involved.

These problems arise from the intrinsic contradiction in objectification by which the very form necessary for the subject's development is always an exercise in self-alienation and is therefore a potential source of estrangement. This is one of a number of aspects of the model which originally stem from Hegel, but the model itself is not Hegelian. It accepts the priority of the process of objectification over either subject or object and recognizes that it is only the process itself which accounts for their appearance as discrete. On the other hand, it does not involve the complex Hegelian construction of the world as ultimately rational; it allows for no philosophical or transcendental resolution, no expressive totality or teleology, no absolute knowledge or ideal communism. The contradictory nature of the process allows for no ultimate resolution.

Different elements of the term objectification may be emphasized, depending upon whether it is applied to the process of ontogenesis, culture or modernity. Analogies between these are themselves important, though their dangers have been pointed out. Habermas, for example, recently attempted to equate ontogenetic and phylogenetic growth using the work of Piaget (Habermas 1979: 13077). In as much as these are, however, different groundings, the term objectification preserves a fluidity, its meaning always dependent upon its particular use. Such relativity is an inevitable consequence of the shift away from philosophy towards anthropology. Objectification as an approach is only useful in so far as it is an aid to understanding a given process in the world. This summary is only a temporary closure in the meaning of objectification. In the third section of the book a far more detailed grounding of the process will be attempted as a means for understanding mass consumption.

PART II

Material Culture
