> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Humility of Objects

## Introduction

Up to this point, the principal focuso analysis has been the cnct of objectification, which refers to a process of externalization and sublation essential to the development of a given subject. It will, however, have been evident in the previous chapters that one particular potential medium or vehicle for objectification has been emphasized: the concrete material object. In this chapter, I aim to narrow the area of discussion down from the larger field of objectification as a process to the question of the nature of the object per se. More specifically, the subject of the next two chapters is the artefact, that form which is the result of human labour, as opposed to equally concrete natural phenomena.

The reasoning behind the present emphasis is that, as observed in the introduction to this work, there is an extraordinary lack of academic discussion pertaining to artefacts as objects, despite their pervasive presence as the context for modern life. In philosophy, for example, there are numerous discussions of objects which refer to some observed attribute or perceptual property pertaining to things as such, but books with titles such as Words and Things (e.g. Brown 1958; Gellner 1959) will be found to have very little to say about the social implications of things as objects, while having plenty to contribute to an understanding of the nature of words. Political philosophy is more concerned with objects as properties than the properties of objects, while phenomenology, as that branch of philosophy which claims more direct concern with everyday objects, considers these mainly as media for addressing the role of agency and the nature of subjectivity (though see McCarthy 1984 for the contribution of Mead). The scale of this discrepancy between theory and practice may ironically itself become important evidence for uncovering the nature of objects in the modern world.

The approach in this chapter will be largely ahistorical and asocial, focusing on the properties of things in themselves, while in chapter 7 the artefact will be returned to its historical context in order to examine how its various potential social attributes are actually realized in diverse circumstances.

The first approach to the object per se will follow the structure of previous chapters by investigating the process of ontogenesis (individual development) through the examination of two particular texts. These will be used to illustrate the way the necessary relationship between object and subject in ontogenesis follows the general pattern of objectification already outlined. Although these studies, derived from psychology and psychoanalysis, show little concern with the specific nature of the culture within which socialization occurs, the detailing of the process itself strongly reinforces the argument that the human subject cannot be considered outside of the material world within which and through which it is constructed. The study of the infant's development also throws light on two further matters which will be addressed more fully later on in the chapter: the relationship between the symbolism of the object and that of language, and the use of the artefact in play.

This will be followed by a consideration of the relatively few attempts systematically to distinguish the social properties of the object from those of language as expressive medium. The differences found between them may throw light on certain rarely remarked properties of the object which suggest that it has a major role in the development of cognitive abilities and the ways in which the world is perceived, understood and lived in. Some of these factors may also account for the lack of academic analysis of the object, compared with the extent of linguistic research. These issues in turn relate back to the process of socialization, which, towards the end of the chapter, will be considered from a more general anthropological perspective, providing a bridge with the concerns of chapter 7.

## The Object in Ontogenesis

On  s lw eult lizujec within the objective structures of a particular cultural orer. Begnning s it does,however, with birth and the very earlest development of the infant, it may be a useul starting point for an examination of those more general properties of the material artefact wc nt   a objectification.

Two particular texts, both published in 1946, will form the basis of the analysis: Jean Piaget's book Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood (1962), and Melanie Klein's article 'Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms' (1975: 1-24). These works examine infant development from the quite different perspectives of cognitive psychology and psychoanalytic studies respectively, but it is worth noting that, within the context of these separate disciplines, Piaget and Klein are both distinguished by their emphasis upon the early stages oinfant development. The selection of these particular texts is on the grounds that they succeed in overcoming a dualistic representation of the relationship between the human subject and culture by avoiding reductionism (either to the external world, as in behaviourism, or to the given subject, as in essentialism). Piaget and Klein also show that it is only through the intrinsically dynamic relationship between the infant and its environment that the subject is able to become itself. While sharing these basic featues with the concept of objectification, both authors also provide a grounding in particular mechanisms which provide exemplification of how such processes may operate.

Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood may be related to a whole series of studies of cognitive development by Piaget. In these, he adopts a Kantian constructivist position which proposes certain basic categories through which alone the world may be apprehended, but recasts them as dynamic forms achieved only through a long process of interaction with the environment, in which the infant develops cognitive abilities as a means of dealing with the world. This allows Piaget to argue for a direct congruence between the structures of the mind and those of the environment.

This constructivist approach is opposed to psychological behaviourism. The external world exists for the child only at that level of complexity which is compatible with the stage of development it has reached. As the child's mental processes become more complex, it becomes increasingly able to absorb and construct for itself the complexities of the external world. In this dynamic process, action is at least as important as perception. Through action, the child encounters the world directly, literally feeling its possibilities and constraints.

The developmental process was found by Piaget to work through a series of stages, beginning with what he called sensory-motor actions, which are very simple, and culminating in adult life with formal operations, such as that sense of a mathematical and logical order in relation to space, time and other domains which may be equated with the mature Kantian series of categories. Piaget's is an epigenetic sequence in the sense that each stage is dependent upon the previous developments and to an extent absorbs, rather than replaces, the early stages. The sequence does not develop of necessity, however, but only through a continuance of the process of dynamic interaction which is the basis of its genesis (Piaget 1971a; 1972).

Central to Piagetian psychology is a dynamic relationship between the processes of accommodation and assimilation. Through accommodation, the mental structures at whatever stage they have reached are themselves changed in order to encompass the particular characteristic of the environment they have encountered. In assimilation, by contrast, the environment is incorporated only at the level of comprehension the child has attained at any given stage (Furth 1969: 14). The same environmental phenomena will therefore be perceived differently by a young child and an adult, according to their respective assimilatory capabilities. As a simple example, at the level of concept formation, one might envisage a child encountering an object which looks rather like a table, though slightly different from any tables previously noted. The child would then assimilate this object into its already formed concept of table, with no further consequence. If, however, a whole series of such objects was encountered, the child might be forced to accommodate its basic concept of what a table was in order to take in these experiences. For Piaget, cognitive development consists of a series of stages in which these two processes advance asymmetrically, but with the mature phase of what he called 'operational thought' only becoming possible when a balance or equilibrium has been achieved between them. A consideration of the cultural context of such concept formations is largely absent from his work.

In Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood, Piaget begins the developmental sequence from the earliest cognitive mechanism, which is a simple stimulus-response form of imitation (Piaget 1962: 81). He suggests that at this stage no object-notion has been formed, and imitation is merely a device for prolonging an interesting event (1962: 85). This process of imitation is an example of pure accommodation, where the child is at the mercy of the environmental events it encounters. Imitation, however, gradually increases in complexity, and becomes more systematic and deferred. Sets of repeated actions may then develop as independent schema, which emerge as play once these sequences achieve sufficient autonomy to be carried out in the absence of any direct stimulant. For example, a child may be observed rubbing its hands together and saying soap, even though there is no water.

There are two elements to this initial use of symbolism: a representational imitation which derives from the early mode of direct imitations, and the new ludic mode which distorts the environment, changing the significance of a given external object, and permitting it to be used as the subject desires (1962: 102). While accommodation iinltio  , as in the classic example of a stick used as a hobby horse (Gombrich 1963). Play leads to increasingly complex imagined worlds over which the child assumes control.

The development of play leads naturally towards involvement in games, which begin in imitative practice such as tying a shoelace, and develop towards symbolic constructions such as of villages or weddings. At this stage, what began as an expression of pure assimilation, in which anything could provide the basis for the child's construction of images, turns increasingly into games with a much stronger accomodative element, as a genuine resemblance is required between the signifier and the signified, and the actual characteristics of the village or wedding observed must be taken into account. Accommodation then gradually moves towards a higher level, at which the egocentricism of play is confronted with the external rules of the social game. The child's gradual acceptance of rule-based games is an important element in the development of its sense of morality (Piaget 1932).

From this point onwards, Piaget's account progresses towards more complex forms of symbolism through which the adult's conceptual apparatus and capacity for cognitive representation are fully developed. In these later stages, the earlier stress on accommodation and the later stress on assimilation come into equilibrium, attaining the reciprocity and balance of fully operational thought. Assimilation in play has allowed the child greatly to improve its powers of abstraction in space and time; that is, to imagine objects far away in both of these dimensions (see also Vygotsky 1978: 92-104).

In a more limited sense, Piaget, like Hegel, is attempting to transform Kantian ontology into a dialectical movement. It is only through a process of dynamic interaction that consciousness is achieved as a sense of self and other. This 'other' is, however, always understood as a projection equivalent to the stage of development of the subject, which progresses through an epigenetic sequence of increasing sophistication and abstraction. For both Piaget and Hegel, the initial stages are highly egocentric, equivalent to the development of mind, but in the later stages the subject is increasingly confronted by the social world in which rules are imposed from the outside. Piaget's work also exhibits a parallel with Marx's concept of praxis, in his insistence that all development is derived form practical interaction with the material world, in which we live, and with which we are held in tension. There are also parallels with (and differences from) anthropological structuralism (Piaget 1971b; Turner 1973). The final outcome of the stages of development outlined by Piaget is also utopian, in so far as he links formal operational thought with the structure of the 'real' world. Like absolute knowledge, operational thought is conceived of as representing the final balance between the processes of externalization (assimilation as projection) and embodiment (accommodation as introjection), which have been held in asymmetrical relations in all previous stages. There are also parallel assumptions concerning the rationality of the actual, which underlies an essential teleology, providing the context within which this developmental process occurs.

As an alternative perspective on infant development, Melanie Klein's article Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms' (1975: 1-24), provides a rather more sophisticated analysis of actual mechanisms which may be involved in ontogenesis, revealing a more complex cycle of interaction between subject and object, which does not presuppose an entirely positive sequence of development. Klein's work developed through several stages, and the article considered here is representative of her later work (Greenberg and Mitchell 1983: 11950).

Klein's model may be introduced in her own words:

I have often expressed my view that object-relations exist from the beginning of life, the first object being the mother's breast which to the child becomes split into a good (gratifying) and bad frustrating) breast; this splitting results in the severance of love and hate. I have further suggested that the relation to the first object implies its introjection and projection, and thus from the beginning object-relations are moulded by an interaction between introjection and projection, between internal and external objects and situations. These processes participate in the building up of the ego and super-ego and prepare the ground for the onset of the Oedipus complex in the second half of the first year (1975: 2).

The crucial terms for an understanding of the development of the infant's sense of the self and its relationship with the outside world are projection, introjection and projective identification (see also Klein 1975: 14175). These are not to be understood as a simple cycle of something being externalized as object, recognized as such, and then embodied, but rather as a complex series of strategies which may include splitting and inversion. They are, however, based around a concept of object relations which asserts that the external forms which are the subject of these mechanisms are always to be understood also as projections. The infant's orientation is not towards a 'real' external world, but its own internal projection, through which that world is constructed. This means that the infant's cognitive and emotional response to the object (which is usually a person) is one of interiorization. Both the ideal good and the ideal bad objects are understood, not as a something external to the subject, but as inseparable from an emerging sense of the world in which such a division is as yet unperceived.

The sequence begins (as with Hegel) with the establishment of the fit j elatin, whi s thereor e st stae towars venual sel-consciousnesses. The object concerned, or, as it may be termed in relation to the mother, the part-object, is the breast. The infant is held to be beset by anxiety which is believed to be related both to the notion of the death instinct, and to its confrontation with the complexity and contradictory nature of its environment. This anxiety is primarily associated with the infant's ambivalent perception of the breast, which is the major source of satisfaction and of benign feelings, but, because it is not always available when desired, it is also the major source of frustration. At this stage, the infant cannot cope with the contradiction implied by the fact that two opposing feelings are aroused by the same object. This first object is therefore not a whole, coherent form, but is split between two forces which the infant tends to see as uncomplicated ideals: one wholly good object and one wholly bad object. The wholly good object may become a focal point around which the emergent ego can form, while in reaction to the wholly bad object, the infant develops a set of strong persecutory feelings.

This stage, in which the infant is concerned only with part-objects such as the breast, is called the 'Paranoid-Schizoid Position'. For Klein, it is the defensive mechanisms the child develops in response to its sense of anxiety which form the basic building blocks of ego development. In such circumstances, the infant may feel hatred, love or fear; but it will understand these as feelings assigned to an external form, which may be introjected. This kind of splitting is a mechanism which is actively pursued by the primitive ego. Thus the goodness which is associated with the good breast may be preserved and protected by being introjected, to appear as an attribute of self; but if the infant's anxiety is aroused by its own feelings of frustration and hatred, the same good object may be projected outwards in order to protect it from the overwhelming badness which the infant feels to be within itself.

The complexity of these relations, and the manner in which they might be used as a model of dynamic mechanisms to extend the concept of objectification from a simple dialectical cycle, is evident in Klein's discussion of infantile hallucinatory gratification. One aspect of the infant's early mentality is its belief in its own omnipotence, which may lead towards an attempt simply to deny the existence of the bad object, thus safeguarding the presence of the good object, and projecting both as idealized forms. Since, however, this is an object relation - that is, since that bad object is itself a part of the ego - this denial is to some extent also a denial of a part of the ego. The basic mechanisms which utilize splitting are therefore always to be understood as a division in the subject as well as the object.

Klein suggests that 'The process of splitting off parts of the self and projecting them into objects are thus of vital importance for normal as well as for abnormal object relations. The effect of introjection on object relations is equally important. The introjection of the good object, first of all the mother's breast, is a precondition for normal development' (Klein 1975: 9). The strategies of splitting are essential for the infant's attempt to deal with the genuine contradictions it encounters in struggling to form some image of itself and the part-objects it confronts. The pathological connotations of the term paranoid-schizoid are more appropriate to the reappearance of certain of these strategies later in life, when they become overextended from their normal place, and therefore develop as aspects of rupture, as when an adult attempts to gain power and control over another person as a substitute for the development of self-discipline.

Later, when the infant becomes capable of relating to whole objects, such as the mother instead of just the breast, it develops more integrative mechanisms in terms of what is called the depressive position. In the depressive postion, the infant can no longer rely on seeing the good and bad objects as entirely separate, but has to recognize their simultaneous presence in the form of the mother as whole object. This results in a more integrative ego dealing with a more integrative object. Integrative does not, however, mean cohesive; rather, the new position leads to still more sophisticated forms of internal and external contradiction and relationships, exhibited in part through more developed emotions, such as guilt and mourning, as the infant deals with the contradictory nature of the mother.

For Klein, the equivalent of the central place of symbolism in Piagetian analysis is the concept of phantasy, which is the form taken by all the mechanisms so far described. The initial model for this work may be Freud's concept of the super-ego, which is the interiorized form taken by parentaluthority. What s plied by the notin  the super-ego is that the child may react less to the actual external forms of its parents, and more to its own projection of them, interiorized as its moral order. Klein's theories of projection and introjection greatly extend this model. The forms taken in projection are often personifications  that is, sensations such as envy, love and hatred understood through an anthropomorphic objectification. This constructivist notion of phantasy is understood by Klein as the primary basis for all symbolic processes, whereas for later object-relations theorists it becomes a kind of false consciousness, or misapprehension of the real world. These processes provide the foundations for the ego, and thus become highly integral and largely intractable. As the sense of self, they provide the basic attitudes and perspectives which are taken for granted in relations with the external world, by virtue of the extent to which they are models into which that world must be assimilated. The parallel with Bourdieu's notion of habitus (see below) may be noted.

Again, there are elements of Klein's work which may be aligned with ideas explored in the previous chapters. Klein provides perhaps the least teleological analysis of the development of a subject, and her examples of adult psychosis may be linked to Hegel's, and especially Marx's, models of rupture, since they appear to result from the subject's belief in the alien nature of some fragmented aspects of the self it has become unable to sublate. Klein's work rests upon a moral and normative order which can either, as in the work of other object-relations theorists, become associated with a particular status quo in terms of family structure and roles, or else, if rechannelled, be used for a radical critique of these same institutions (e.g. Frosh 1987). The most interesting element in this analysis is, however, the complex nature of the mechanisms themselves, whose twists and cycles are able to capture a sense of dynamic interaction in a manner which may escape that vulgarized version of the dialectic which is commonly used to represent processes of this kind.

## Play

The implications of these general approaches to ontogenesis for the nature of the artefact become clearer when they are directed at a specific problem, the nature of play. For Piaget, the activity of play represents a major advance in the ability of the child to control its own evironment and engage in a variety of strategies. To illustrate this point, Piaget uses the following examples: the creation of imagined characters to provide a sympathetic audience for a child's actions or speech; catharsis, as when a doll is allowed to ride a machine which a child fears; and compensatory combinations, as when a child goes through the motions of pretend washing up when forbidden access to the real thing by its parent. The manipulation of this internal world may provide a safe basis for trying out combinations and ideas prior to, and sometimes instead of, attempting them in the real world. It is also an essential aspect of the development of the internal world of thought.

Compared with the majority of recent social theorists, Piaget is unusual in de-emphasizing the role of language in the development of symbolism. Indeed, for many other writers the two are seen as virtually synonymous. Piaget, however, asserts in the introduction to his work that 'We shall rather show that the acquisition of language is itself subordinated to the workings of a symbolic function which can be seen in the development of imitation and play as well as in that of verbal mechanisms' (1962: 1-2; see Vygotsky 1978 for a contrary view). One of the first uses of language is merely as a subordinate subject for play. Piaget attempts to map the increasing capacity for abstraction implied by the symbolic function, showing that in this development, language, which depends on an entirely conventional relationship between sign and signified, is bound to come at a relatively late stage. Play with objects, which retain a physical similarity between sign and signified, or where some concrete form may be used to represent the distant other, then becomes an essential prerequisite for the development of the symbolic faculty found in language. It is only after the child has interacted with the external world and its construction at a sufficiently sophisticated level that language as abstract reference becomes feasible. By then, however, the semiotic function of language is already established. Later Piagetian writers, such as Furth, have shown through their work with the deaf how inessential language is to the development of intelligence (Furth 1969: 11920).

Klein's emphasis on play develops from more pragmatic concerns. The use of toys is central to Klein's major methodological addition to the psychoanalytical tradition of pyschotherapeutic analysis: that is, her play technique' (Klein 1975: 122-40; Segal 1979: 35-44). This technique arose from the inability of a child to perform the 'rituals' of the adult psychoanalytical tradition in couch-based sessions of verbal exposition. Instead, Klein supplied the child with a variety of material forms such as human figures of various sizes, plasticine and other malleable substances, and attepted to interprett actions in relatn to them. Some of the interpretions she provides, especially the emphasis on overt sexual imagery, may strike the reader who does not belong to the psychoanalytical tradition as quite unconvincing, but even i the specic o her analysis are rejecte, what erges cleary is of play as enactment.

Klein is not the only psychoanalyst to have commented upon the place of material objects in play. Freud's example of the fort-da game in which the child pretends to lose and find something as an enactment within a domain it can control, of its sense of separation from, and the return of the mother, provides a classic case of the problems of how to interpret vicarious activity. (Freud 1984: 2837). Of particular significance is the account by Winnicott (1971) of the role o the 'melly blanket in the development of the self. The smelly blanket is that particular, usually siled, object from which the hild hates to part. Winnicott observed that such 'transitional objects' were important, precisely because they may appear to the infant as not fully part of the external world, and therefore not entirely separate from the child's own body.

While studies such as those of Klein, Winnicott, Piaget and Vygotsky have resulted in elegant explanations of the place of play with material objects in child development, there is a common inference that this becomes relatively redundant in later life. However, to interpret play as merely a stage towards, for example, the more satisfactory situation of pure verbal expression while lying on a couch, would be unfortunate. If language is seen as increasingly taking the place of explicit negotiation, communication and conscious thought, there is the possibility that, simultaneously, material objects become increasingly important in the formation of the unconscious, a possibility raised by Freud (though only briefly) in relation to repressive mechanisms (e.g. 1984: 206-8). This provides a link with the more general tradition developed from Freud, which emphasizes the unconscious as an alternative site for the study of the contradictory nature of the individual (and social) body, especially in its relations with the external world seen as a 'reality principle'. This ambiguous position of the object, between self and the outside, and its relationship to the unconscious, will be further explored below.

## Objects and Language

In contrast to the study of objects, the study of language is surely one of the most flourishing of all academic pursuits, a major success story in the social sciences. One result of this has been the pervasive influence of linguistic methodology upon such studies of objects as have developed in recent decades; and while the rise of semiotics in the 1960s was advantages in that it provided for the extension of linguistic research into other domains, any of which could be treated as a semiotic system (e.g. Eco 1976: 9-14), this extension took place at the expense of subordinating the object qualities of things to their word-like properties. Major influences were the linguistic studies of Saussure (e.g. Humphrey 1971) and Chomsky (e.g. Faris 1972; Krause 1978). In this literature, questions have been raised around a whole host of categories, relating to how far objects signify, symbolize, connote, denote, realize, constitute, reflect, embody and perhaps also objectify. There have been fierce debates over the differences between objects as sign and as symbol, and over degrees of iconicity, most of which can be reduced to levels of abstraction involved in the process by which objects become vehicles of meaning (see Lyons 1977 for survey).

Dominating such studies has been a tendency to perceive objects as being reflective in a relatively passive sense. As noted in chapter 4, social anthropology has tended to privilege society and social structure as prior phenomena which posses a certain profound reality, and in this tradition patterns located in objects might be held to reflect back to some social division or model from which they derive their source and significance. The concept of objectification provides the basis for examining such an assumption, and any critique of the notion of society as the privileged signified over culture may be extended to consider the nature of the sign in general. On these grounds (but not on others), the implications of objectification have much in common with a whole series of critical writings which argue that representation or symbolism, as a relation between signifier and signified, tends to promote the unproblematic assertion of the signified (for example, the modern conception of the self) rather than investigating the mechanisms by which these are constructed in the symbolic process itself (e.g. Coward and Elis 1977: 122-52). A further example is the critique by Baudrillard of utility as privileged signified, which was noted in chapter 3. Any simple notion of signification as reflection trends towards a subject-object dualism which fails to acknowledge the process underlying their mutual construction.

Tw problem mege rom th litrature: rst, the senc  ny consideration of the specificity of the object; and secondly, the relatively simplistic form of reference which tends to be used in object analysis. In order to direct the discussion towards the particularity of the artefact form, rather than the problem of the mainly linguisitc sign, artefacts need to be explicitly distinguished from language. There have been very few attempts systematically to contrast their different properties. The only cases I have encountered come from discussions of aesthetics, although that by Langer (1942) is dominated by the image of the painting, while those by Colquhoun (1981) and Scruton re based n the exampl  architectue. Laner represents the distinction as one between 'discursive' and 'presentational' forms. Language and thought are discursive processes from which a series of independent component parts derive their overall meaning through sequential articulation. The rules of grammar are intended to anlayse the structure underlying this discursive order. A presentational form such as a picture, on the other hand, has no natural divisions; one could not take, for example, the division between light and shade as independently meaningful. In assimilating a presentational form we have to take it in all at once, rather than sequentially, and there is nothing equivalent to grammatical structure underlying it (1942: 903).

Langer discusses in detail some of the implications of these differences, focusing upon their capacity for expression. She sees presentational symbolism as the major vehicle of objectifying feelings, and argues that these are thereby under-represented in our philosophies (1967: 1012). A limitation of her analysis, deriving from its emphasis on aesthetics, and found also in some of the recent discussions of media and advertising, is a tendency to exaggerate the unique properties of the individual object, as against the type-token nature of words which almost always refer back to some generic category. Art and unique objects are, however, only a minute proportion of the material world, and our ability to discriminate through perception is as pronounced for the everyday observation of fashion and cosmetics as in any appreciation of fine art. In most material culture, the individual object is as much a type-token of the larger group of identical handbags, armchairs, spears or canoes as is the case with words, and, even when held as individual property, may thereby mark the relation of object and owner to the set of items it represents.

Scruton's (1979) critique concentrates on the claims of semiotics. He argues that the structures found in architectural rules should not be credited either with direct semiotic import, or, necessarily, with propositional content. Architecture also differs from language in its strict observation of its own rules and conventions, and in its sense of detail. The analogy with syntax or grammar is therefore rejected. Rustin (1985) notes that Scruton places undue emphasis on the referential approach to language in semiotics, ignoring the equally powerful structuralist component (see Sperber 1975 for a parallel comment on anthropology). Colquhoun (1981: 130) is also concerned to expose the limitations of semiotic studies of objects based on Saussure, but in this case mainly with respect to their synchronicity, attempting to characterize several differences of objects from language in the way in which architectural styles change. For example, in language change occurs only in one part of the system at a time, while in aesthetics whole styles may alter, as in the transition from Gothic to Classical architecture. Colquhoun also notes the impossibility of abstracting some 'arbitrary' meaning outside of the spatial and functional context within which the materials of buildings operate, underlining particular differences such as the realiance of architecture upon self-referential and 'traditional' modes for its meaning; in other words, its historicism.

Less remarked on are the inadequacies and crudity of language when facwi  yci. Thp  l through a simple reflective exercise. Imagine for a moment attempting to describe in detail the difference in shape between a milk bottle and a sherry bottle, or the taste of cod as against haddock, or the design of some wallpaper. Clearly, compared with our ability to make fine discriminations of perceptual qualities and immediately to recognize and discriminate amidst a profusion of ordinary objects, linguistic description may appear slow and clumsy. This simple observation is crucial to the argument of this chapter, as it allows us to question ingrained assumptions concerning the superiority and greater significance of language over other forms of expression.

Another difficulty arises when trying to assess how far different media may k  lT    , which appers t erve ust such a purpose, has been illustated vy clearly by the linguist Lehrer in an analysis of the language used in the description of wines. Through her experiments it became evident that, despite the extensive elaboration of wine descriptors and the beliefs of the participants, neither lay persons nor experts were actually communicating knowledge about wines to their fellows in conversation, such that the wine referred to could be recognized from linguistic description alone (Lehrer 1983). By contrast, many studies of objects such as buildings, which discuss the links between architectural form and a set of ideals such as scholasticism or imperialism, indicate the degree to which such objects are significant as propositional forms, even as to the nature of the worlde.g. Panofsky 17; King ed. 180). It appears, then, that although the object has different qualities from language it may be equally impressive in the areas of expression and communication in which language is most esteemed. In the next section, however, the emphasis will be on qualities of the ojct which language cannot share.

## The Artefact Per Se

An analysis of the artefact must begin with its most obvious charcristic, hi ihat t exist   ysical ee nam provide the key to understanding its power and significance in cultural construction. The importance of this physicality of the artefact derives from its ability thereby to act as a bridge, not only between the mental and physical worlds, but also, more unexpectedly, between consciousness and the unconscious.

The question of the place of objects in the formation of mental imagery may be referred back to the discussion of play. It is clear that during a certain stage in the child's development, artefacts become its principal means of articulating feelings and desires. The linguistic mechanism is a more sophisticated means of articulation which requires the complete break between sign and signified essential to the development of the arbitrary basis of pure linguistic symbolism. O, however, byvirt  the nc tue, cn nev possss that entirely arbitrary and abstract capability. While perception of objects may not be prior to those mental apparati which absorb them (a version of the Kantian categories), it does act as a firm physical constraint upon them.

It appears that play begins during the period when the separation between consciousness and unconsciousness is becoming more deeply dichotomized, and that, following the development of language, objects never again have such a prominent place in our articulation or self-expression. This feature of child development has echoes also in social development, where there is an analogy with the role of objects in socal reproduction before the acquisition of writing skills; at this stage objects as authentic objectifications of the ancestors were, along with oral tradition, the major means of ensuring the continuity of social reproduction (Weiner 1985).

These accounts may therefore imply that, as language strengthens its hold on consciousness and, through writing, on the explicit world of knowledge, objects may retain their place in the ordering of the unconscious world. Consciousness appears to be almost wholly dominated by language as the medium of thought and expression, so that the entire surface of cognitive processes and voluntary responses appears to be channeled through language. It is to this domain that we conventionally ascribe our image of self and of importance, identifying strongly with our controlled ability to articulate what appears to us to be the content of our own will. Contrary to approaches influenced by Lacan, there seems little reason to suppose that the unconscious is structured largely in relation to language or some other grammatical form, since in the intellectual representation of the external world it is possible to account for symbolic processes thrqugh a variety of other

Most of the major advances in the social sciences over the last two centuries, including the work of Freud and Marx, should lead us to be suspicious of any equation of importance with surface, suggesting that there are other forces both historical and unconscious which underlie this arena of language and linguistically articulated intent. We have some knowledge of these processes in cases such as proxemics, where our spatial orientation to objects may be observed as both cultural and normative (Hall 1966). In general, however, it is only the massive gulf between perceptual ability and linguistic competence of conscious articulation which provides evidence in day to day experience of the power of an unconscious oriented towards objects rather than language; but this alone implies that the object world holds great significance. This is not to deny the vital role played by language in naturalizing cultural differences such as gender roles, but rather to assert that artefacts may be still more powerful mechanisms in this process.

This relationship between object and unconscious is by no means obvious. Indeed, the very concrete physicality of objects might lead us to expect quite the opposite conclusion, which is that it is language which organizes the deep unconscious, while objects as visible images are a relatively superficial phenomenon. If, however, the social properties of objects are not as 'evident' as they are visible, this very factor may actually be, in part, responsible for our inability to appreciate the significance of the object. This, in turn, might account for our difficulty in dealing with objects through academic studies dominated by language. Rather as with other areas fundamental to the operation of the unconscious, artefacts may resist conscious articulation and in a sense be embarrassed by language.

This argument may be exemplified by considering one of the mechanisms through which we deal with the everyday world. It was suggested earlier that our image of the artefact is constantly dominated, not only by linguistic analogies, but also by the concept of art and the uniqueness of the object of art. One of the very few art historians to have moved away from the unique art object to consider more mundane phenomena is Gombrich, whose book, The Sense of Order (1979) attempts to make generalizations about the nature of design, s opposed to art. In distinguishing between these two, Gombrich uses the picture frame as an example of design. This is a felictou choie, sic t rve the ual puro examiing des at the same time as providing a basis for a definition of art, from which it is distinguished. Following Kant, many aesthetic theories emphasize the particular manner or attitude of regarding the object of art; for example, the way a work of art commands our concentration and consideration, producing an abstracted and contemplative gaze. By contrast, the definition of a good frame is almost exactly the opposite; it should be immediatley absorbed without any period of consideration and, rather than being the focus of attention in itself, should direct our attention to the object within it. In short, the frame enhances, but it is not itself, the subject of attention. What is crucial to this argument, if extended a little beyond Gombrich's own assessment, is that the frame's anonymous and modest presence belies its significance for the appreciation of the work of art. It might be suggested that it is only through the presence of the frame that we recognize the work of art for what it is, perceiving it and responding to it in the appropriate way. In short, it is the frame rather than the picture which establishes the mode of appreciation we know as art. Placed in another context, such as the billboard, the work of art might well fail to attract either attention or interest. Where the conventional wooden frame is inappropriate, as in many forms of modern art, the gallery itself provides the larger frame which is an index of the nature of its contents; or, at a still more abstract though obviously more explicit level this function is performed by the category art itself.

In this intance, by establishing a relationship of immediacy with our unconscious, one object is able to control the nature of our consciousness, making it appropriate to the context within which that object is working. This principle proves to have general validity. There have emerged at different times a number of theories of social pyschology or sociology which provide versions of what Schultz (1970: 245-62) termed multiple realities. Goffman's version, presented in his book Frame Analysis (1975), most directly extends the example used by Gombrich (see also Giddens 1984: 73-92 for a parallel case using discursive form). Goffman's emphasis is upon a wide range of cues which tell us what kind of activity or behaviour we are engaged in. Quite often these are object cues, such as the theatre or church, which signify more general catagories such as drama or religion, thereby providing an appropriate setting for particular attitudes and kinds of behaviour. As in these two examples, the frame may occasionally be conspicuous and possibly highly ornate, but, more commonly in everyday living, objects as frames play on inconspicuous and normative cultural role. Even when an object such as a picture frame or set of clothes is highly ornate and may be the topic of conversation, it is usually intended to pall before the glory of that which it encloses: the work of art or the person.

The humility of the common object is especially clear in an area of mass material culture such as furnishing. While it is possible to draw attention to these object frames as forms of display, more commonly they are the appropriate background for living. What is important is that they should not draw our attention towards them by appearing in some way wrong, inappropriate or misconceived. More appropriate terms are warm, friendly, modern or stylish, and if our attention should focus upon the pattern or texture of the wallpaper or upholstery, this should always be in order to comment on the taste of the selector. In modern linguistics, we are often told of our remarkable ability to construct meaningful sentences which we have never previously heard; yet this is surely matched by our ability to absorb the social implications of an array of furnishing consisting of a combination which is not only almost certainly in some degree unique, but some of whose basic elements may also be new to us. It is clear that this impression made upon us is no less significant in determining our conception of the individuals concerned than the articulate self-expression represented by the conversation we may be engaged in within this setting.

This example illustrates one of the many ways in which unconscious, non-linguistic processes may act to control conscious and linguistic articulation. This is not to deny some level of autonomy to the latter, but to reject assertions of its virtual total autonomy. Even in linguistics, the recent rise of pragmatics as opposed to syntax and semantics as the basis for understanding the nature of meaning (e.g. Sperber and Wilson 1985) should suggest that, while the contextual world of objects may be the last and most overlooked component of the mechanisms of social interaction, it may very well prove, when finally excavated from its embedded relationship to the unconscious, to be the most significant factor of all.

Few anthropologists have focused specificially upon the place of the object in social reproduction. Most tend to privilege language and the interview as media of expression. In the crudest forms, the informant is reduced to that which he or she says, and the idea of the anthropologist going beyond or against that particular limited form of expression is considered suspicious, though this attitude is unusual. Exceptions to this bias towards language include a crude behaviourism still strongly asserted in some archaeological theories which reduce the artefact as cultural construction to merely part of the process by which an environment works its determinant force upon the human subject. Other exceptions are the highly objectivist forms of analysis such as structuralism, which tend towards the opposite extreme of a virtually autonomous logic of cultural forms.

One anthropologist who has been noted for attempting to retain a balance between bjectivist and subjectivist analysis s Perre Bourd iu. In his work as in the present study, there has been an attept to mediate between the physical world of practices as a determinant material structure and constructivist analysis of the material world as inseparable from the cognitive means of its appropriation. A brief account of Bourdieu's notion of 'habitus' provides an example of how we might assimilate the apparent paradox of an external physical world which is nevertheless in a more immediate relationship with the unconscious than the world of articulate symbolism. It also allows us to consider directly the implications of the object as physical form which mediates between the subjective and objective worlds, and to do so within an anthropological mode sensitive to the specificity of culture. This may facilitate a return from the ahistorical concerns of psychology and linguistics, where analysis of the object threatens to remain fetishistic, to the world of social action where such analysis is reintegrated into cultural studies.

In his key work on this subject (1977), Bourdieu begins with a critical account of that anthropological structuralism which provides him with one of his main methodological tools. Structuralism may be employed to excavate the principles of classification and order which unite what on the surface appear as highly disparate domains, so that for a particular society food preparation, kinship and myth may be revealed as transformations of each other. The problem with this 'high' structuralism is that it tends to offer only an extremely objectivist account of social action, in which the human actor is merely a vehicle for the autonomous working of certain ordering principles. When used to account for anthropological observation, it may become a series of mechanical and inflexible models.

Bourdieu wished to retain what we have learnt from structural analysis, and yet to mitigate its objectivist implications by emphasizing that such structures produce not rules but dispositions, and underlie not determinacy but strategy. Structuralism may help us to understand the construction of the subject as cultural being, but must then allow for the action of that self-referential subject upon history. Bourdieu, by virtue of his many anthropological examples, provides one of the most satisfactory resolutions of this age-old conflict between being made in history and creating history. This positive concept of strategy is also very different from the more common nihilistic rendering of the same problem (e.g. by Sartre 1976). The account of habitus given below is, however, greatly traduced by summary.

The 'habitus' is that structured set of classificatory schema which is inculcated in the child as its sense of cultural propriety and normative order. As excavated by structuralism, the underlying order found, for example, in house layout, exchange relations or morality, may be reducible to certain basic patterns or transformations. By absorbing these, the subject is then in turn able to impose them upon some new domain not previously encountered, and thereby immediately to assimilate this into its particular cultural order. These closely woven principles are specific to certain groups - for example, gender or class - and lead also to a sense of identity between those who share habitus. This sense of order is a given, fundamental, rather than negotiated, disposition.

Habitus is learnt through interactive practices, as the acts of living within a world which is composed of this same order are continually reinforced in different domains. In fact, this is a process of familiarity rather than learning. Since these domains are physical, they act to provide the agent with objective probabilities producing subjective (rather than individual, Bourdieu 1977: 86-7) aspirations which are usually restricted to aims the agent has some prospect of accomplishing (Bourdieu 1977: 77). It is these same practical taxonomies which serve to exemplify the principles of cultural order. In certain societies, formal education may attempt to make explicit and controlled some of these processes of learning, and it is no coincidence that Bourdieu is otherwise known as a writer on the French educational system (e.g. Bourdieu and Passeron 1977; 1979). In both cases, he explores the hierarchies within and between these classification systems, and their importance for an understanding of ideology and power. It will be clear that for this approach an artefact which already embodies a categorization process is clearly distinguished from a natural object which does not.

Bourdieu's concept of habitus starts as constructivist rather than behaviourist, with the external environment being differentially absorbed and interpreted from the perspective of the subject as a member of a social group. It thereby links socialization processes, by which a new generation is culturally incorporated, with the longer term movements of history and the process by which culture itself is reproduced, thereby developing as a dynamic praxis, or an objectification which avoids determinism. The habitus is viewed as a structured set of dispositions which provides a basis for the enactment of strategy according to interest, perspective and power. As with language, the generative order does not dictate the result of its use. Our ability to 'read' objects for their social appropriateness and to impose upon any series of new forms that order which would make them culturally acceptable does not in ny respect lessn the plac strategy, or the possibility of intent; both, however, are accomplished within objective conditions of which we have an underlying

In common with Langer, Bourdieu stresses the relationship of this object world to feelings rather than language; it is those expressions of disgust, distaste and discomfort which best express our sense of something being 'wrong'. It is a world in which the grimace is often more eloquent than the phrase. Although concerned to embed his ideas in practices Bourdieu is not himself especially concerned with defining the role of the artefact, but it is clear how his work contributes to such a task. His examples taken from fieldwork amongst the Kabylia of Algeria, using house form, motor-habit and calenders, provide abundant further evidence for this relationship between the order of artefacts and the unconscious absorption and creation of cultural form. He constantly affirms the effectiveness of order embodied in details such as dress, body movement and manners, and argues that it is a function of the mundane artefact st always   earde s example  metrivnwy of systematic academic study.

At this point it is possible to return to the most evident implication of the physical nature of the artefact as symbol without appearing to invite a crude behaviourist concept of materialism. Clearly, an object may always signify its own material possibilities and constraints and therby the more general world of material practices. What is of importance is certainly not the idea of physicality as some 'ultimate constraint' or final determining factor, but rather the manner in which everyday objects continually assert their presence as simultaneously material force and symbol. Our images of the house are continually modified by the actual houses we encounter, and our perceptions of their size, shape, order and limitations; and the effect of this is most pronounced when we engage in attempts to alter, extend, or discover pleasure in some physical aspect of this materiality which may resist these constraints. The use of artefact as symbol does not in any way detract from its significance as tool, material worked, or environment experienced. Material culture studies derive their importance from this continual simultaneity between the artefact as the form of natural materials whose nature we continually experience through practices, and also as the form through which we continually experience the very particular nature of our cultural order. This is most especially the case in industrial society; in London, for example, there is no 'natural' environment to be opposed to the socially constructed form. In view of this it is reasonable to conclude that all experience of physical force is mediated by its prior constitution as a cultural category.

Using the example of the work of Bourdieu, it has been argued that, although the object may be closely associated with the most fundamental and hidden aspects of socialization, this does not mean that it must be analysed only by determinant, rule-based objectivist procedures, since as an instrument of social strategy it retains a high degree of flexibility. This flexibility is suggestive of certain properties of the artefact as physical form. Recent social theory has emphasized the variety of interpretations to which texts may be subject, with linguistic texts, as usual, providing the dominant models. Yet, clearly, any account of the death of the author as arbiter of the final 'meaning' of a given text (Barthes 1977; Foucault 1977a), is potentially matched by the important, though much less addressed, question of the transcendence of the industrial designer, who, as Forty (1986) has shown, should never have been ascribed the autonomy often assumed. The problem of interpretation is closely linked to the place of the artefact in intersubjective order. In the examples discussed in the previous chapters, such as the work of Munn, it was clear that the individual is already closely oriented towards a social order by external forms such as the landscape, in which conceptions of the person and of society are literally grounded. This idea can now be refined through Bourdieu's concept of habitus, in which the social group's perspective upon some form is always predicated upon the historical construction of its dispostions, interaction being a conjuncture which cannot be reduced merely to its immediate context (Bourdieu 1977: 81). The artefact plays an important role here, because once again its physical and external presence belies its actual flexibility as symbol.

Symbolism, which is always a relationship of evocation, is held in most studies to be a highly variable process which is dependent upon the social positioning of the interpreter and the context of interpretation. This is fairly obvious with a relatively abstract form such as a moral code. We are used to the idea that a statement of belief or propriety is continually open to challenge, and that debates concerning its correct interpretation are never fully resolvable. The artefact, on the other hand, tends to imply a certain innocence of facticity; it seems to offer the clarity of realism, an assertion of certainty against the buffeting of debate, an end or resting point which resolves the r a civA , qu l the object is just as likely as the word, if not more so, to evoke variable responses and invite a variety of interpretations. In fact, language, through abstraction, is a much more efficient form of communication and possesses much more control over its interpretation, and it is te artefactual symbolism than in linguistic symbolism.

This is of major importance. In so far as differences in social position, such as class and gender, lead to different perspectives, that which is evoked by the objects in society will also be different. This problem, which, where conflicts of interest are involved, becomes one of ideology, need not lead to overt conflict, however, because the groups concerned may be quite unaware of the discrepancy. A male may not be aware of the possibility of a female's alternative reading o what an object constitutes or signifies; similarly, it may never occur to a member of a one social class that some revered object may be subject to a parodied and subversive interpretation by members of another. If two groups acquiesce in the representation of their perspective through the same array of objects, which for one group is acceptable because it is bright and cheerful, while for the other is acceptable because it enshrines a sense of good design, each may project its own perspective onto the other; in this case, the object permits the coexistence of two perspectives, rather than the dominance of either. The fact that objects may become the source of actual struggles over conflicting interests will be discussed in chapter 9 as part of the general problem of ideology.

To conclude, in order to examine an area which is rarely focused upon in itself, it has been necessary in this chapter artificially to abstract the object, considering it in rather universalistic terms, and in relation to a perhaps overdrawn dichotomy with language. In practice, of course, the object is usually a historical phenomenon, which confronts us as evidence for a larger, anterior cultural tradition within which we exist, and is inseparable from the linguistic mechanisms which are central to our knowledge of it. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to assume that the specific nature of the object, and in particular its physical presence, will result in a tendency for it to act in certain distinctive ways, compared with other media of cultural expression.

It has been argued that the artefact may perhaps best be understood as playing a series of bridging roles. It does not lend itself to the earlier analysis of symbolism which identified distinct abstract signifiers and concrete signifieds, since it simultaneously operates at both levels. Instead, it has been suggested that the object tends towards presentational form, which cannot be broken up as though into grammatical sub-units, and as such it appears to have a particularly close relation to emotions, feelings and basic orientations to the world. The artefact may be used to promote fine distinctions through its relation to extremely sophisticated mechanisms of perceptual discrimination which tend to remain outside of consciousness. finally, its physical presence exemplifies the concept of praxis, in that this materiality is always an element in cultural transformation.

In relation to Bourdieu's concept of habitus, the artefact was noted as playing a pivotal role in social reproduction, where it forms part of a reconciliation of objectivist accounts exposing the mechanisms which create the subject in history with an interpretation of the social nutl The artefact's affinity to the unconscious also allows it to play an important role in marking different forms of social reality, and allowing these and the perspectives arising from different social positions to exist concurrently without coming into overt conflict. In objectification, the artefact appears to be instrumental in linking these major processes of abstraction and specificity. Finally, these two characteristics of the artefact  its extreme visibility and its extreme invisibility - may also, through their relationship, in large measure account for our difficulty in appreciating the importance of material culture for social relations.
