> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Artefacts in their Contexts

## Introduction

Although  chapter n attempt was made to investigate the au orect  en  crsoexiatin  eat actually employed within different societies reveals the extreme diversity of uses and connotations among physically similar forms. Whatever properties are delineated as especialy appropriate to material artefacts in general, these cannot be regarded as necessary attributes of an individual artefact when considered in any particular social context. Societies have an extraordinary capacity either to consider objects as having attributes which may not appear as evident to outsiders, or else altogether to ignore attributes which would have appeared to those same outsiders as being inextricably part of that object. In this respect, the study of the properties of objects in the social sciences is quite dissimilar to equivalent studies in physics or chemistry, where statements about these properties take the form of law-like propositions. An attempt to identify those social properties which pertain to objects as artefacts, for example, as opposed to the properties of words as discovered by linguists, or dreams as discovered by psychologists, can only be achieved through a balance between two procedures. On the one hand, it requires the transcendence of cultural relativism in order to discuss objects in terms of their general potential, but on the other hand it demands the recognition that these potential attributes need not necessarily be realized or acknowledged in any particular cultural context.

It was argued in chapter 6 that the physicality of artefacts makes them much harder than language to extricate from the particular social context in which they operate, and that for this reason they pose a particular problem for academic study. My intention in this chapter is not to construct a systematic model of the properties of material culture in society, but rather to investigate through a series of illustrations the interaction between material culture and certain

contextual dimensions, emphasizing the implications of the materiality of the object as symbol.

There is at present no academic discipline which sees it as its specific project to examine the nature of artefacts as cultural forms. The physical properties of objects revealed in the natural sciences may well have an important bearing upon discussions of the technological constraints on manufacture and utility, but these studies do not differentiate, as a prime dichotomy, between the artefact and the natural substance, and indeed are largely concerned to reduce the former to the properties of the latter. More surprisingly, this distinction is equally absent in the discipline of psychology. Studies of cognition which seek to elucidate the nature of that cultural order which we might impose upon or recognize in the world may well be concerned with the classification of objects, but they generally fail to acknowledge, let alone address, the difference between artefacts such as cutlery which already incorporate categorization in their manufacturer, and objects such as trees which do not (e.g. Rosch 1978: 305). Consumer psychology attempts to relate sets of objects to groups of people as target' populations, but, whilst it deals entirely with artefacts, it does not address the question of their particular nature as cocete material culture. A similar ailure t analye the artefact p se has already been noted in philosophy.

The only branch of academic analysis which, by virtue of its title, might have been thought to represent a candidate for this specific area of study is that sub-section of anthropology known as material culture studies. Yet although this sub-discipline has from its origins been concerned with the nature of the artefactual world as an element of culture offering insights into that part of social behaviour which is oriented towards the creation and use of objects, the rather particular history of this series of studies has hitherto severely limited its application.

At that period of the nineteenth century when the discipline of anthropology was coming into being, material culture\_ studies represented the very core of this emergent social science (e.g. Haddon 1895; Tylor 1881). Both to armchair academics, and, though museum displays, to the population as a whole, objects were representative of the peoples of distant cultures. They were closely integrated into the emerging central paradigm of social evolution, according to which the lvel o histication  the ects was held t mbolize the place of such peoples as a kind of fossil record of social development from the primitive to the civilized (Steadman 1979; Chapman 1985). This significatory potential of the object was seen as being affirmed by arcaology, which produced a sequence from the early stone a to the iron age and beyond, providing a temporal foundation for these assertions of social evolution (Lowrie 1937: 2). If evolutionary studies provided a vertical dimension within which objects could signify the development of societies, this was complemented by the growth of diffusionary studies in which the horizontal distribution of objects over the globe was thought to be further evidence for the movements of both peoples and ideas, for example, from origins in ancient Eygpt or Germany. These two dimensions provided the basis for the first coherent theories about the connections between the peoples of the world.

In the twentieth century, however, there was a revolt against the dominant paradigms of anthropology, and evolutionary and diffusionary theories were rejected in favour of direct participant observation, in which jc o longer mediate in th elatnhp between the anthropologist and the informant. The discipline became dominated by two new theoretical models: first a functionalist theory of synchronic adaptation, and later structuralism. Both of these rejected the notion of the primitive as used in the earlier studies, as well as the evolutionary concepts which had legitimized that notion. The very success of material culture studies in having been so firmly integrated into the older paradigm meant that such studies become invalidated by their own historical associations, and were no longer able to play a significant role in the new anthropology. The amount of research in material culture studies declined (e.g. Fenton 1974), and tended to become reduced to two of the peripheral areas of anthropological enquiry. These were either the study of technology integrated within a general study of human adaption to the environment, which presupposed a particularly immediate relationship between society and the environment, or alternatively an anthropology of art which, by contrast, emphasized the greatest possible distance between people and their environment, in order to focus upon exotic and esoteric practices. The middle ground, within which lie most of the current concerns of social anthropology, was increasingly nored, as far as consideration of the social use o ojects is concerned.

The discipline within anthropology which maintained the closest relation to material culture studies was archaeology, which has always been highly dependent upon such studies, since its task of resurrecting ancient societies is based in large measure on the interpretation of the material remains excavated from those societies. During the course of the nineteenth century, archaeology moved in a quite different direction, becoming, like the earlier diffusionary theories, increasingly obsessed with objects as such, and treating them as having an independent behaviour in a manner which separated them from any social context and which amounted to a genuine fetishism of the artefact. A series of archaeological studies in the 1960s (e.g. Clarke 1968) proclaimed a science of the object based on systems theory and patterns of artefact change, or highly detailed examination of the properties of flints, bones and pottery. Only in the sub-discipline within archaeology called ethno-archaeology, where archaeologists worked in contemporary ethnographic situations in order to study the relationship between peoples and their material world, was it usually impossible to ignore the social basis of material culture (e.g. Gould ed. 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981; Hodder 1982a; Kramer ed. 1979). Recently, however, there has been a reversion to analysis of prehistoric artefacts in terms of their contextual social relations, as semiotic and ideological representations, with respect both to users in the past and for us today (e.g. Hodder ed. 1982; Miller and Tilley eds 1984).

To conclude, the fact that there has been to date remarkably little progress towards an independent discipline of material culture is due, at least in part, to the particular history of that field within anthropology. Other reasons for this relative absence were discussed in chapter 6. In order to pursue the implications of the generalized account given there of the artefact as symbol, the following sections examine a set of particular domains. These are chosen somewhat arbitrarily, and, needless to say, others might have been included. In each case the intention will be to emphasize the artefact's constitutive character, rather than treating it as a mere reflection of social relations, that is a 'human mirror'. In most cases a single example of the relationships between the object and a given contextual domain has been selected for illustrative purposes, although it will be obvious that there is a vast number of alternative relevant instances.

## The Artefact as Manufactured Object

The factor which distinguishes the artefact from the natural objt is that it is the product of human labour. Although structuralism, in its extension of the Kantian position, has constantly asserted the cultural nature of those natural phenomena which impinge upon us only through being assimilated by our own categorizing processes, these may sill be ieniate rom rtect, wih whi such a sem I artefact', some notion of intention is also usually attributed to their creation; for example, a gas cloud may emerge as an unpredicted by-product of a technological process, though this product of human labour is only marginally an artefact.

Since manufacture always has to be practised upon materials, its first implication is that it may show signs of the constraints these materials bring to the technological process (Gombrich 1979: 6394). Some materials, such as stone or wood, are largely subtractive, in that there is a natural substance from which parts are taken away, through chipping, sawing and other means, to create the finished artefact; while others, such as cast metal or clay, are additive, in that a quantity is utilized in a plastic state which can take the shape of a template or mould. Any such artefact may seek either to proclaim or to hide the material used and the constraints the material has imposed upon the technological process: a mask may be thought to incorporate the spiritual properties of the wood from which it is taken; a group of people may refuse to purchase an item known to be of seal skin; a plastic may seek to copy a more traditional material; the gold from which an object is made may have far greater significance than the actual form into which it has been hammered.

In a society with a relatively unpronounced division of labour, it may be difficult to distinguish manufacture as a separate arena of social relations which are specifically signified by its products. As in the case of the construction of canoes for the Kula (Munn 1977), technology may be thoroughly embedded in cosmology, and even social theorists who would eschew a technological determinism, but wish to characterize societies through more mediated concepts such as 'modes of production', have often had to subordinate the organization of production to a host of other elements of social organization such as kinship and ritual (e.g. Godelier 1972; Hindless and Hirst 1975; Kahn and Llobera eds 1981).

An insight into the relationship which may be found between technology and cultural form in such societies is offered by the argument formulated by Franz Boas (1955) concerning the origins of primitive art (see also Gombrich 1979). Boas identified two major sources for this art: the drive towards representation and the tendency to create pattern. The latter, he suggested, stems from the basic motor-habits involved in simple technological processes which revolve around regular and repetitive movements, such as those of the hand in sewing, basketry, or weaving. These sequences may give rise to a kind of play, in which they are exaggerated, inverted or otherwise re-ordered in such a manner that a regular pattern or rhythm emerges in the finished product. The interplay between these sequences and the tendency either to see representational figures in pattern, or alternatively to repeat representational figures in such a way that they reduce to pattern, was held by Boas to be the foundation of art and design, providing the basic dimensions which united the diverse media of craft production, music, dance and poetry.

Using material from the Kwakiutl peoples of the north-west coast of America, Boas showed how the major stylistic features of their material culture, such as an extensive use of bilateral symmetry and the disintegration of animal representations into pattern, could be understood as emerging from the interplay of technology and constraint. For example, the problem of representing threedimensional figures in two dimensions lent itself to the splitting of animal forms so that they faced out in both directions, joined by a centre line around the mouth and spine. In turn, these tended to become complex and ambiguous images such that, as anthropomorphized animals, they could represent the transformation of human and animal forms (Vastokas 1978), or through the focus upon the mouth could illustrate the principle of voracity according to which human killing and eating of animals ensured the cyclic reproduction of all life in the world (Walens 1981). Here, then, manufacture as technology involving materials with certain properties becomes an integral part of the emergence of culture incorporating the visual embodiment of the nature and legitimacy of a certain social order, which in turn forms part of an encompassing ontology (Goldman 1975: chapter nine).

With a more developed division of labour, and particularly with industrial production, the separation of the sphere of manufacture, as found, for example, in Marx's privileging of this particular domain, has tended to become more pronounced. An object may then become a conspicuous example of non-industrial production, such as the homespun Khadi cloth of India popularized by Gandhi as a symbol of Indian independence, and still a potent emblem for Indian political parties (Bayly 1986). The nineteenth-century arts and crafts movement developed by William Morris and others was also succesful in advertising the hand-crafted status of their products. This kind of 'natural' product gains its meaning entirely from its opposition to industrialization, and is thus always indirectly produced by industrializton.The conradictory atur  this reatinshi s illustraty the experiences of a community of potters in Japan, who, through the equivalent of the arts and crafts movement, were held as exemplifying a natural, anonymous and traditional form of production. When publicized as such through a visit by the British potter Bernard Leach and Japanese enthusiasts, however, the potters were forced to adopt new forms of marketing and production in order to meet the demand for these symbols of their purity, whilst at the same time preserving, for the benefit of the tourists, the appearance of producing works of art untainted by industrialization (Moeran 1984). As is evident from the writing of Hegel, Marx and many later writers, technology itself, elea ion  tal ill uon e wor y become the foundation for the dominant ideologies of the industrialized world (e.g. Castoriadis 1984: 299--59).

These cases suggest that when manufacture as the signified of the object, becomes reified as having a separate and particular connotation it is not the actual process of manufacture which is of importance, but the ability of the object to stand for a particular form of production an its attendant social relations. The bject has always had the biliy to proclaim one technological origin while actually deriving from another. The skeumorph, in which, for example, a stone blade copies the style of a metal object, is a classic find in archaeological excavations of early bronze age sites. With the development of machinery, the mass produced object intended to disguise its origins and look like the product of hand labour has become well established. In many cases, this symbolism is part of a more general ability to proclaim or deny a distance from nature.

Although the artefact may stand for a particular form of production, it cannot be assumed that it will do so, or that the divisions which appear as significant from one perspective upon modern society will necessarily emerge as the major dimensions of differentiation in the object world. It might be thought, for example, that the major distinction between socialist and capitalist development, terms which are founded in contrasting philosophies of the proper relations of production, would be a prime subject for the symbolic capacity of the modern artefact. In practice, when making a purchase, it is very rare for us to note whether an object is made by a cooperative or a private factory, or in East or West Germany, and extraordinarily this division appears hardly, if at all, within the major symbolic dimensions of the contemporary world of commodities. We do not think in terms of capitalist shoes and socialist shoes. From this example, we can draw a conclusion of crucial importance for the analysis of material culture: divisions which may appear important in language and ideology may be absent from object differentiation, while distinctions within the domain of artefacts may constitute important divisions which would elsewhere be ignored or denied.

## Artefacts and Function

In no domain is it as difficult as it is in the matter of function and utility to distinguish the actual place of artefacts in human practices from the particular legitimations and assumptions we have about them. In many societies, the classification and labelling of objects appears to indicate a close relationship between artefact and particular function, and the labels 'kitchen chair' or 'fryingpan' in Britain may be matched, for example, by an equivalent close relationship between pots and their labels in Nepal (Birmingham 1975). Function apears to play a key role in infant recognition and naming of objects (Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976: 22935), and, in adulthood, continues to play an important, though highly flexible, role in the description of objects in daily life (Miller 1978). What is problematic about this is the common assumption that it is caused by, and in turn indicates, some relationship of efficiency between the object and its use, such that this is the prime reason for its particular form, being either the natural outcome of adaptation, or the product of deliberate design processes for industrial goods.

Although functional purpose must impose a certain constraint on the shape and form of an object, that constraint is generally a very loose one for everyday forms (though obviously not for machine parts). A moment's reflection upon the several hundred different shapes of glass bottle in an off licence, all of which serve essentially the same purpose of containing liquids, or upon the variety of clothing in the high street, or china in the store, indicates this high degree of variability. Even though the individual shopper will often find some functional justification for his or her particular choice, as being especially practical, other reasons, some of which will be analysed in later chapters, may be adduced, relating to social rather than functional considerations which may more convincingly account for the majority of purchases.

While for some this may be evident enough in the society of mass consumption, it has equally commonly been assumed that this degree aabilty  berrant result  the wastae  moden cpitalm, and that the 'pristine' subjects of social anthropology live in a far closer relationship with the iven needs f ther environment (.. Forde 1 The vast arrays of artefacts to be found in ethnograhic museums which serve as simple vessels or clothing are, however, eloquent evidence for the distance between form and function in non-industrial as well as industrial societies. In parts of Melanesia such as the Solomon Islands, for example, relatively homogeneous tropical forest may be the setting for an extreme variety of cultural forms, such as spears or armbands, as one moves across an island archipelago. Detailed observation of the hand-made containers used in a South Asian village reveals a wide variety of forms designed to serve identical purposes, and a very loose relationship between form and fitness for function (Miller 1985: 5174).

Just as with manufacture, the artefact may be used to express not actual efficiency but an ideal of function. In modern practices, this ideal has been conceived of as a principle of utility, to be embodied in the creation of the artefactual world. With modernism, the strongest assertion of the value of utility is found in the assumption that aesthetics may be subordinated to function. The proper modernist artefact is always held to be aesthetically pleasing precisely to the degree to which it exemplifies the adage that form follows function (Benton and Benton 1975). However, the actual reproduction of modernist form over the last century and a half has revealed exactly the opposite tendency, since objects formed entirely on the basis of utility have proved singularly unattractive (which accounts for their general absence from commercial marketing). This has not in any way curtailed enthusiasm for the principle that good design is based upon utility among its acolytes in London's Design Centre or the Boilerhouse Project  the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, where beuty through ergonomics may still be an avowed aim.

Once again, this division does not accord with political affiliation; Baudrillard attacks Marx and Marxist assertions of natural utility with as much vehemence as contemporary critics attack modernist architecture as an elitist imposition of ideology upon the general public. This embodiment of utility and technological rationality in the object as modernist form may be a powerful example of the much more general tendency towards the legitimizing role being played by technological rationality in the modern world (e.g. Habermas 1970; Sahlins 1976a). In movements such as 'hi-tech', objects most clearly come to exhibit a principle of utility quite detached from any consideration of actual purpose, as the style is applied (as was streamlining in its day) indiscriminately to steam irons or armchairs. With hi-tech style, as with much of modernism, it is evident that the theoretical articulation of these principles is far less developed than their material expression. Indeed, hi-tech could be better understood as a set of principles distilled from a collection of material forms than as objects intended to embody prior principles.

The object form which has always been seen as most clearly exemplifying the utility principle is the tool. Tools, after all, extend the very possibility of humanity as productive agent, and thus make for obvious analogies with biological function. When understood as our 'extra-somatic means of adaption' they have become almost definitional of culture (White 1959). This notion of the instrumental object as an extension of being should not, however, be reduced to a relationship of efficiency, since an agriculturalist may wax more lyrical about a musical instrument than a plough, and the microcomputer's popularity may be greater among those who in common parlance 'waste time' in obsessive programming or games, than among those who use it as a practical means to some other end. It is the object's relationship to the social group which is crucial, rather than its ability to perform a transformation of nature under the sign of utility.

The artefact's capacity to separate itself from the immediacy of a relationship embodied in the concept of utility is most evident in the manner in which it is used for precisely the opposite function, that is, to separate the individual from productive activity. Although one means of detachment from the world is a spiritual asceticism based upon a lack of material possessions, more common has been the desire to accumulate luxuries and objects which themselves signify the lack of any need to engage directly in productive labour. The object's ornate and fragile form is an emblem of the leisure class which is constituted precisely by this distance (Veblen 1970). Civilization is most commonly defined not as greater efficiency in crop-growing and manufacture, but precisely as the preservation of distance from these activities.

## Artefacts, the Self and Society

One of the limitations of anthropological investigations of the social meaning of artefacts is the tendency to Romanticize non-industrial societies as prior to objectification in the Marxist sense of rupture. The classic statement on this question with respect to the person was by Mauss (1979), who argued that the contemporary concept of the sel is a relatively recent creation, strongly tied to the rise of varius legalistic notions of the person in relation to property in ancient Rome and emerging in its modern form after certain developments in eighteenth-century German philosophy. Recent objectivist approaches in the social sciences and philosophy have attempted to equate all reference to the self with a particular and historical bourgeois self inextricably related to capitalism. Anthropologists, in turn, have attempted to argue that, for example, the transition from brideservice, in which labour is performed by the prospective groom, to bridewalth, where ects are iven  exchange r the ie, marks a significant difference in the development of a phenomenon whereby objects may stand for human labour, with the implication that this is the first stage towards the conditions of property and alienation as we know them today (Strathern 1985). This theme, which relates the development of individualism and alienability specifically to homo economicus, has been a longstanding concern in philosophical and political anthropology (e.g. Dumont 1977).

Although we may find a particularly explicit conceptualization of the autonomous self in certain contemporary societies, this may be only an aspect of the more general separation and autonomy of concepts evident in modernist theory. While some capitalist societies may practise an extreme individualism, it is surely only a Romantic tendency to dichotomize which denies the possibility of this characteristic to all other societies. The specific objectification of a moral and juridical individual through the use of objects may be found in a wide range of societies, including those where kinship rather than the economy appears to be the dominant organizational principle.

The phenomenon of certain mundane objects becoming so firmly associated with an individual that they are understood as literal extensions of that individual's being was discussed in some detail by Levy-Bruhl (1966: 100-27). In many societies, the clothing, ornaments and tools belonging to an individual may be considered so integral to him or her that to touch or do harm to these inanimate objects is considered indistinguishable from taking the same action against the person. Such property is identical to the person and may stand for that person in his or her absence. It may well be burnt together with the corpse as an equal form of the physical detritus of death. The 'self' objectified in the object will be differentially constructed according to the cosmological context. Tambiah (1984) has recently described an example of the transformation from one form of embodiment to another in Thailand, where buddhist amulets objectifying the charisma of forest saints are exploited by certain individuals as a means of gaining material advantage in their business dealings in the city.

As was noted in chapter 4 with respect to recent work on the hau, by embodying ancestral links objects may be the basis of an individual's present social identity such that loss of the object would itself constitute a danger to the legitimacy and viability of the personage and the group he or she leads (Wiener 1985). At the other extreme, societies, may allow claims upon that which we consider inalienable. For example, in areas of the South Pacific it is not uncommon for parents to have to relinquish a new baby to admiring kin who have claimed it (Sahlins 1976b; Silk 1980). It is more useful to argue the variable nature of the relationship between the individual and society than to assume a linear evolution towards the autonomous self. Even between societies which may be subsumed under the label of late capitalism, such as the USA and Japan, there may be considerable differences in this regard (Abercrombie et al. 1986).

Anthropological discusion of this relationship between self, object and society is dominated by the more general analysis of exchange. Until recently, emphasis was most commonly placed on the object as gift in the tradition of Mauss, but some consideration is now also being given to what is too often taken merely as the gift's antithesis, that is the commodity. Appadurai (1986) provides a survey of some of the relevant literature, pointing out that in some respects commodities are not necessarily as divorced from wider cultural considerations as is often supposed. Almost all societies have elements of an exchange of objects in which persons are directly implicated, market exchange in which they are not implicated, and separate spheres of exchange which constrain the equivalences between things (e.g. Douglas 1967; Miller 1986).

Mauss's underlying concern was with individualism as an aspect of the fragmentation and disembedded nature of capitalist society. The problem is not, however, unique to capitalism. The fundamental opposition which may erupt between economy and society was noted by Simmel, who observed that the merchant is identified with the relative autonomy and abstraction of flexible exchange and is therefore often, as 'stranger', held in an ambiguous and partially anomalous relation to the host society (e.g. Simmel 1950: 4028). Indeed, Parry has recently argued that it is only under the conditions of a relatively free market that there is evidence for the entirely disinterested gift, in which calculation should be entirely absent, this being a product of the same emergent duality (Parry 1986).

Any consideration of the relationship between commodities and persons is overshadowed by the concept of property which, as Sartre (1969: 575600), Simmel (1978: 306), and others have noted, cannot be separated from the basic relationship between being and having. In turn, discussion on this topic often focuses less upon the effect of property relations today than on the links established between property as an institution and Locke's concepts of individuality and natural rights, and, in turn, Marx's critique of private property. Unfortunately, the particular division most often invoked in contemporary political rhetoric concerning private and public property is misleading with regard to this issue, since the concept of private property suggests a close relationship between person and thing, whilst in practice private property is an institution which works to produce precisely the opposite effect. Private property as a notion conflates the direct relationship between the individual and those objects with which heor e is assciate i e-constructon with those over which e of abstract relationships between anonymous people and postulated objects, an extreme example of which is the relationship between shareholder and investment. In terms of the legalistic concept of private property, an individual is able to own an object with which he or she may have no personal relationship, thus preventing others from realizing their potential for achieving such a relationship. The claim to legitimacy of particular possession is based entirely upon the institutionalization of rights.

With respect to the object as objectification it might be better to use a term such as personal property, which assumes a genuinely self-productive relationship between persons and objects. The classic case of private property would than become not home ownership but the ownership of sombody else's home. The confusion of private and personal property as the subject of criticism has led most people, who for good reason wish to defend property with which they are intimately associated also to defend institutions which may result in their alienation from such property. People wishing to own their council house may thereby' be led to believe mistakenly, that the present institutionalization of private property is in their interests. Using a concept such as objectification, in which the cultural nature of the subject-object relationship is brought to the fore, the lines of this particular debate might be redrawn with important political consequences. Personal property is best linked with communal rather than private property, such as state or kin-held property, since it is a statement of relative inalienability, such that the social subject, individual or collective, associated with the object retains control over the conditions under which it may be alienated.

## Artefacts and Space

The relationship between the materiality of the artefact and the materiality of space is especially close. Various authors have attempted to investigate the qualities which pertain to the nature of spatial order as such (e.g. Hillier and Hanson 1984), and many others have investigated the social use of space with particular reference to architecture (e.g. Ardener ed. 1981; Gilsenan 1982: 164-214; King ed. 1980). Berman (1983), following Benjamin and Simmel, gives a vivid impression of the impact of urban form as the media through which modernity was transmitted to become the precondition for contemporary Western society.

In certain societies, spatial planning has been used to represent a sacred order which is of an ideal form, and within which actual human society attempts to exemplify certain principles, often creating tightly controlled urban populations ordered according to spatial dimensions such as left and right hands, verticality and circumambulation (e.g. Geertz 1980; Wheatley 1971). In South Asia, such religious cosmologies were replaced under colonialism by equally explicit secular images of power and authority, as in the layout of Imperial Delhi (King 1976). These elements of spatial order as representation are complemented by the impact of new material developments such as transport systems, which may affect our sense of space and distance. Much recent geographical research has been devoted to the relationship between space and time (Thrift 1977).

One example of the function of the symbolism of space is the fact that artefacts have always made an impression on us by virtue of their exotic qualities. Lapis lazuli was probably valued in the ancient world not only for its colour, but also because it was derived from a single source and thus always signified its origins as distance. In archaeological literature, goods imported in small quantities have often been studied under the general term of 'prestige goods', and, as such, control over these resources appears to have been a major factor in the rise and fall of early social hierarchies (Friedman and Rowlands 1977). Distance, which increases the problem of access, may be used to emphasize the differential ability of elites to acquire sumptuary objects, or, for peripheral areas such as Anatolia, might signify the awe with which the core civilization of Mesopotamia was regarded. In contemporary societies, goods which are difficult to obtain because of their exotic origins vie with highly priced goods in competing status systems.

As in the previous areas discussed, objects may not merely be used to refer to a given social group, but may themselves be constitutive of a certain social relation. One example is the use of objects, as opposed to the experience of actual peoples, to objectify the dual notions of orientalism and primitivism, which have dominated the way the Occident has historically constructed its self-image. It was noted at the beginning of this chapter that early European travellers brought back objects to represent the peoples of other lands and, through the arrangement of these objects in museums, contributed to the development of early theories of social evolution and diffusion (Steadman 1979). These objects were often used to exemplify the competing images of the Romantic and nobel primitive and the cannabilistic barbarian as suited the arguments or interests of the time. Smith (1960) has shown how images of the Pacific islanders were manipulated in these two directions, and Mitter (1977) has traced the varied history of European interpretations of Hindu sacred statuary, from viewing them initially as images of the devil, to finally incorporating them as works of art. On further investigation of many of the objects themselves, it becomes clear tht they not only represent the selection of non-European artefacts by Europeans, but may also themselves be manufactured as objectifcations of the relationship between different societies.

One instance of this image-construction is the 'Oriental' style of cloth (Irwin and Brett 1970). Some years ago, research workers at London's Victoria and Albert Museum and elsewhere encountered a considerable quantity of textiles in a recognizable style, composed mainly of exuberant large blossoms with curvilinear stems, sometimes joined to trees which were no longer rooted to the earth. At first, researchers attempted to place this style in the area from which it was assumed to originate - perhaps Persia, China or Central Asia - but through historical research it became clear that this was based on the false premise that the cloth was made in the original style of a certain group of people. In fact, it seems that this chintz was the product of a relationship rather than a society. When Indian cloth was first imported to Britain, it was in great demand because of its enormous tenical superiorityover British materials, European cloth dyeing being stillin its infancy. The actual Indian designs were not, however, to the taste of the British at the time, who had developed a somewhat different image of Oriental peoples. The consumers' hints and suggestions, communicated over considerable distance and thereby often greatly distorted when realized by the manufacturers, resulted in changes in the cloth, which in turn prompted further comments. Gradually, through several cycles of modification and response, there emerged a style embodying an image of what the European consumers thought the Indian manufactures ought to be making for themselves. This design has come to be known as the Oriental style, since it objectifies precisely what Said (1979) and others have termed orientalism. Similarly, much of what has been called primitive art or ethnic art consists of objects made in that style which manufacturers in various parts of the world have perceived to be demanded of them (Graburn ed. 1976; Williams 1985). Indeed, objects used for inspiration by the artists in the nineteenth-century Paris studios were from parts of West Africa which had been making such images for European consumption for centuries (Donne 1978).

The point to be made here is one common in contemporary discussions of racism. Nation-states define themselves, in part, in terms of what they are not; that is, by setting themselves in opposition to alternative degenerate or ideal societies. Both people and objects are then required to exemplify the stereotypes which have been constructed. Within the Occident, such a process has been highly influential in the development of genres both in an older literary tradition and also in more recent media such as film. In the recent film Return of the Jedi, for example, the imaginative licence of science fiction is combined with a reverence for genres already developed within the film industry in order to offer images of Orientalism and primitivism extended and exaggerated beyond the point of realistic representation of 'other' peoples or goods (for an extension of this argument see Miller forthcoming; for a comparable example see Spooner 1986).

## Artefacts and Time

Like spatial position, temporality is an intrinsic property of the object, which always exists in time, and will potentially signify the amount of time elapsed since it was created. As was pointed out in chapter 4 through Lévi-Strauss's example of the Australian Churinga, material objects are often the principal means of objectifying a sense of the past. The historical associations of the object of art noted by Benjamin (1973) pertain almost inevitably to any object which can be said to have passed through the hands of the ancestors, and are often a pivot around which social identity is constructed.

The concept of primitivism enables a society to construct its self-image not only by objectifying its concept of other distanced peoples, but also by conflating the dimension of space with that of time. Thus, contemporary peoples living in distant areas are viewed as though they were relics of one's own past (Fabian 1983). The temporality of the object may also contribute to our sense of identity by evoking the past of our own society. This is crucial for large-scale societies such as nation-states which, by virtue of their size, demand some concretized form such as a monument which can serve as a focus for the populace's identification with the state.

One example of this use ofartefacts is derived from the relationship between the discipline of archaeology and the nation-state. Archaeology has as its declared intention the reconstruction of past societies and the understanding of processes of long term social change. In practice, however, its main result is the production of large numbers of ancient artefacts and monuments. One advantage of the fact that it can often produce little contextual information in comparison with this massive material product is that the labels given to this material are often relatively arbitrary. Archaeology therefore has the ability to impose, with relatively few complications, the particular contemporary boundaries of the nation-state upon its findings, and to identify thee as the prehistory of Germany r Italy.As prehistory, these are typically based on sequences ranging from paleolithic stone axes through bronze age pottery to iron age swords. Since these are relatively common finds of a mundane form, the highly parochial local museum can often contribute its own sequence which is a version of the overall national pattern, thereby helping to embody in material form, and as an aid in teaching, that sense of history which underlies the collective identity presupposed by the state.

Different objects may serve different purposes in this regard. The large monument is territorially fixed, and, as an assertion of identity, it is commonly the basis of claims to both territory and historical achievement; for this reason archaeological monuments such as Great Zimbabwe and Masada have particular significance in newly formed countries such as Zimbabwe and Israel. The smaller portable artefact, by contrast, lends itself to being exported to areas outside of its site of discovery, and thereby provides evidence for more abstract legitimations; for example, the claim by colonial governments to represent the historical legacy of a sequence of great accomplishments is subsumed and given meaning by the concept of civilization. Thus, Britain as colonial power could represent the achievements of ancient civilizations such as Mesopotamia or Eygpt as the beginnings of a linear historical relationship leading, not to the people who now dwell in these same areas, but to Britain itself. In the museum display of these materials (such as the treasures of Tutankhamun's tomb), stress may be laid on the objects' discovery by British archaeologists, thereby helping to legitimize the implicit pseudo-evolutionary claims of historical advance as civilization (Gidri 1974).

This may also have positive consequences. The Solomon Islands is a new nation-state which may have been created through the imposition of an arbitrary boundary, but has to exist as a viable institution within the modern world. One of the constraints it suffers is the dominance of a history which tends to be reduced to that of either missions or colonial discovery, with the implications that the Solomon Islanders themselves were a stagnant and unchanging people prior to the arrival of Europeans, a view reinforced by some of the dominant synchronic traditions in social anthropology. By tracing artefactual change over several millenia, archaeology can produce materials which are regarded as directly ancestral by the modern population, even though different from those used today. Thus, mundane objects such as clam-shell axes and fish hooks may be used to objectify a concept of self-development and self-created change which may potentially be a powerful force in the rise of post-colonial states (Miller 1980).

Just as objects may come to symbolize time, so time is the context in which the symbolism of the object must be understood. In the case of a large archaeological monument such as Stonehenge, the object acts as a text which may be differentially interpreted, according to the period, as emblem of ritual power, as ruin, as national monument, or as symbol for druid and hippie (a process which is already evident in prehistory, see Shennan 1983). Barth (1975) provides a remarkably clear instance of the alteration of the 'meaning' of a set of objects, in his account of a sequence of initiation rituals within a particular New Guinea society. During the rituals for initiation into each successive age-set the 'true' meanings of certain sacred objects are revealed and it transpires that the interpretations given at the previous stage were false or partial. Almost all mundane objects possess some kind of biography through which their significance may radically alter. For example, the pottery made in an ordinary Indian village may start as a ritual object whose meaning is derived from the ceremony within which it is presented. The same pot may later on serve a specific function, holding only those items appropriate to its name. Later still, it may be dissociated from this role and used for general storage, in which case its previous specific symbolic role is ignored, and it is no longer of consequence whether its ritual status accords with that of its contents (Miller 1985: 17283). Similarly, a blouse which is purchased from a shop as an alienable commodity may then become so intimately associated with a particular individual that it may not even be borrowed by a sibling, After some time, however, the object may lose this close association, becoming, as jumble, an alienable commodity once again.

These two elements of temporal symbolism, the object standing for time and time controlling what the object stands for, come together in the realm of fashion. What makes an object fashionable it is ability to signify the present; it is thus always doomed to become unfashionable with the movement of time. Fashion usually operates within a system of emulation and differentiation in knowledge, such that it uses the dynamic force of object change as a means of reinforcing the stability of the social system within which it is operating (Miller 1985: 18496; Simmel 1957). Consideration of fashion, and indeed of markets in general (e.g. Geertz 1979) where the value of the object is related to highly transient knowledge, reinforces the impression of possible instability in artefact symbolism, and its dependence upon wider information-based and other contextual features. The older tradition of semiotic anthropology, in which objects were said to represent fixed denotations for a given society, based only on synchronic structure and with little consideration of when and where the interpretation was taking place, seems to be invalidated by these fur nserations.Slary, cncets l and authenticity are re-defined within a general theory of objectfication, as properties of relationships rather than of either peoples or things, the place of time in determining the implications of context becomes of major importance.

## Artefacts and Style

Up to now, objects have been related to external contextual dimensions in an unmediated form, without consideration of their internal organization. Although the term style'is often used to cover a wide range of artefactual properties which relate such artefacts to their social environment (for example in archaeology Hodder 1982a: 12584, 2047; 1982b 17396; various papers in Hodder ed. 1982), here it will be used to refer solely to the relationship between artefacts within a given object domain, such as all windows or all cars.

Little mention has been made so far of those elements of material forms which relate to each other in an ordered fashion, and which may thereby influence the manner in which they are utilized in constituting cultural patterns or acting as systems of meaning. In the latter case, an exact equivalent to grammar in linguistics is unlikely to be found, since, as noted earlier, objects gain their effect from their comparative lack of abstraction and the various bridging functions they can thereby perform. This greater reliance on context means that the branch of linguistics termed 'pragmatics' (e.g. Levinson 1983; Sperber and Wilson 1986) is likely to be of far greater significance than semantics of syntax in those material culture studies which investigate the object's communicative abilities.

The first manner in which objects may be related to each other is as type-tokens. Most artefacts are either the product of mass production, in which case they are identical to all others items produced by the same process, or else are intended as equal copies of a normative cultural notion, in which case, for example, all spears of the same type are intended to look alike. Where objects are deliberately unique it may be that they are intended to signify some generic concept of uniqueness, such as in art; the object is then both an individual form and an example of a larger category to which it must be related. Objects as catagories may, however, be related more to the fuzzy logic of normative and peripheral forms than to the contrastive logical approach of componential analysis and binary opposition (Kempton 1981; Rosch 1978).

At the next level of analysis, every object may usually be organized into a given field within which it contrasts with all others, for example the various types of curtain, canoe, car or ornament. Such a field is commonly organized according to the principle of style, which may be defined as the use of certain limited dimensions upon which the variability of a domain is expressed. Thus, certain aspects of the artefact will be used to create distinctions of flavour, type of lid, colour or length of skirt; but in all these cases other properties will be uniform througout the range. It is this which helps us to recognize that an object is from a certain period or particular place. The thousands of varieties of European shirts may differ in terms of button types and collar lengths, but they remain recognizable as shirts as opposed to garments used in other cultures for an identical functional purpose; and this is because the manufacturers, as it were, agree to differ with respect to these specific and limited dimensions. Such internal order is highly significant, since it reinforces the point that objects are not best understood as merely subservient to social divisions. Social groups may be divided according to the logic of objects with which they associate, which includes the objects' autonomous tendencies towards pattern, as well as their physical constraints.

At the next level, objects in different domains may be organized according to a comparable underlying logic. This principle has been most forcefully demonstrated in structuralist and semiotic analyses (e.g. Friedrich 1970; Humphrey 1971). In structuralism, these formal properties are taken at a relativley abstract level. Lévi-Strauss has recently provided his own examples of the material artefact as pseudo-mythic form. In a study of masks used amongst the American Indians of the north-west coast, he shows the Xwexwe masks of the Kwakiutl, with their bulging eyes, protuding jaws and tongues, are the inverse transformation of their Dzonkwa mask which have sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, and no tongue, but are the same as those masks called Swaihwe of the neighbouring Sailish. He compares this material inversion to the opposite pattern of semantic inversion integrating noting that 'when from one group the plastic form is preserved, the semantic function is inverted. On the other hand, when the semantic function is retained, it is the plastic form which is inverted' (Lévi-Strauss 1982: 93). In such an analysis, the transformations of the cultural forms become almost independent of their social vehicles, as societies themselves are understood as merely variants upon a deeper structural order. In a sense, this inverts the Durkheimian tradition from which it originally stemmed, by representing society as a reflection of style.

As with the other areas discussed above, style has achieved a certain autonomy in contemporary industrial society, going beyond its capacity for ordering to become itself the focus of concern. This was brought out in an incisive account of the impact of the Bauhaus on modern society by Baudrillard (1981: 185203), in whose view this principle of creating order through style has become dominant over social interest, as a kind of structuralism imposed on everyday life. The Bauhaus is seen as the symbol of a drive to make all human creations serve the principles of style. In this new world, all architecture, furnishing, clothing and behaviour are intended to relate to each other in a visibly coherent fashion. This works to break down all frames into a universal order of good design. The matching colour scheme is extended to all commodities, so that a given company may prefer to purchase machine tools manufactured by a firm with a reputation for design in microchips, attracted by that firm's modern hi-tech image rather than its reputation for efficiency (Fry 1982). Ironically, that set of ideas and ideals which expressed the legitimacy of form following function was most effective in ensuring that function followed form.

Baudrillard perceives this as the product of multi-national capitalism, but on reflection this principle is not so different from the utility of relations enhanced by the object which was stressed as socially cohesive in a non-industrial society. Among the Kwakiutl, discussed above, all objects may be related through a style expressive of an orality in which humankind achieves significance by its place in a universal cycle of devouring and reproduction (Walens 1981). Religions have also often attempted to reduce all human action to stylistic embrace as an expresion of cosmological pretentions. Modernism must be granted its specificity, but it also has its precursors.

## Conclusion

If the implications of the examples surveyed in this chapter can be summarized in a single idea, it is that the medium of objectification matters. It makes a difference what form is used in the process of becoming; and of those media used in objectification, physical artefacts have certain properties and tendencies which, in an age of rapidly increasing material culture, ought to be investigated in their own right. The physicality of the artefact lends itself to the work of praxis - that is, cultural construction through action rather than just conceptualization. The object also acts to integrate the representative individual within the normative order of the larger social group, where it serves as a medium of intersubjective order inculcated as a generative practice through some version of 'habitus'. This order is continually objectified in the pattern or style of the artefactual world.

The object may lend itself equally to the expression of difference, indicating the separate domains to which people or aspects of people belong, and to the expression of unity, connecting otherwise diverse domains. Although conventionally the totalizing property of the artefact is stressed as a condition of the non-modern (e.g. Bateson 1973; Forge 1973), and the commodity is viewed as the fragmenting medium of modernity, both forms in fact exist in both contexts. For example, in several cases in the present text, the object has been shown to be expressive of quite autonomous elements of the dimensions analysed, as function beyond efficiency, image of manufacture beyond actual construction, pure individuality, coherent style and so forth. What is curious, however, is that it is often the same object which does all of these things. The image of modernism as artefact is in this sense a totalizing image using the project of art as its means of accomplishing such totality (compare Gell 1986 for the ability of the commodity to perform this function in a non-industrial context). Thus the high-modernist building was able simultaneously to enshrine a notion of pure rationality in systems-building, pure formalism in its opposition to ornament, pure functionality which was seen as the basis of its aesthetic value, and pure style. It was thus held to be as authentic an image of the society within which it was produced as the gift, whose authenticity was premised upon its own totalizing ability. In practice, however, both are cosmological pretensions which achieve their aim only by virtue of the object's other ability to keep apart the many alternative orders and demands which would threaten the purity of these abstractions.

The deeply integrated place of the artefact in constituting culture and human relations has made discussion of it one of the most difficult of all areas to include in abstract academic discourse. The mundane artefact is not merely problematic but inevitably embarrassing as the focused topic of analysis, a practice which always appears fetishistic. Its study is therefore in its infancy, and the cases presented above provide o more than a glimpse ot potential interest. The flexibility of the artefact indicated in the deliberately wide range of examples provided should not, however, lead the reader to assume an arbitrary or unsystematic use, any more than the flexibility and uniqueness of languages excludes the possibility of linguistic analysis.

PART III

Mass Consumption
