> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# The Study of Consumption

## Introduction

The remaining chapters of this book will all be concerned with the potential application to the understanding of mass consumption of the ideas about objectification and material culture so far developed. The focus of attention will move to contemporary Britain, although examples will also be drawn from elsewhere.

In Britain, our relationship with goods is almost entirely one of consumption. Even those directly engaged in industrial production are more likely to be immediately associated with a complex work process than with an identifiable product. The consumption of goods is quite remarkably neglected as a subject of study outside of formal economics and models of individual purchasing behaviour. This becomes evident if one considers the goods we encounter in terms of some fairly simple criteria. Such goods might be divided into those we possess and those we encounter but do not possess. These may in turn be sub-divided; goods possessed may comprise either the results of private purchase or goods allocated by the state, while goods not possessed tend to fall into two categories: first, those we encounter as material forms, in particular the built environment, the goods of our acquaintances or those in the high street shop, and secondly, goods we do not experience directly, but which appear to us through the media for example in television, magazines and advertising. It is indicative of the lack of serious analysis of the artefact, however, that even for such a politically sensitive issue as the division between private purchase and state allocation, the implications for the subsequent relationship people have with those goods are quite unknown (with the possible exception of housing). Studies of the impact of production relations on a group's identity have not been complemented by equivalent studies based upon consumption.

The discussion of consumption will be divided among three chapters. In the present chapter, a brief account of the historical background to contemporary consumption will be followed by a resumé of some of the approaches to this issue found in various disciplines, one of which, the tradition stemming from Veblen's work on goods as the expression of social differentiation, will be discussed in more detail. Chapter 9 will be devoted almost entirely to the general question of how active a role should be ascribed to consumers in understanding the meaning of goods in social relations today, and the nature of goods as material culture. The final chapter will attempt a more general model of consumption in terms of the concept of objectification.

## Consumption and the Industrial Revolution

The problem in discussing consumption is that our 'common sense' understanding of the phenomenon is often merely a reflection of the ordering of the processes we see around us. An object is manufactured before it is purchased, and we therefore have a tendency to see consumption activities as the result of, or as a process secondary to, the development of manufacturing and other forms of production. In the history of Britain as taught in schools and conventionally rendered, the great event of modern times was the industrial revolution. It is this epoch which has traditionally marked for pupils a break from learning about royalty and politicians to noting the dates of inventions such as the spinning jenny and Arkwright's mule. Industrialization provides the backdrop for the study of the subsequent transformation into modern economic classes: the rise of colonialism is explained in terms of a search for markets, and wars in terms of economic competition.

An exception to this tendency towards a belief in technological determinism is that branch of Marxist history which follows Marx himself in preferring to focus on changes in the social organization of productive relations. Marx provides a clear example of this in his analysis of the period of manufacture during which the social organization of production became concentrated in a variety of ways, uc    t ewho in the production of a particular item. Such social changes are shown to be prior to, and necessary precursors of, any technological changes, such as industrialization (Marx 1974: 318-47). More recent literature on proto-industrialization (e.g. Kriedte et al. 1981) continues the same tradition. Marxist writings emphasize the social organization of production he aryh mation d, an emphasis continually reproduced in the abundant use made of the term 'capitalism' in most accounts.

Historical documentation in this field becomes more scarce as the emphasis moves towards other aspects of social organization, despite the highly influential work of the French historian Braudel, whose books (e.g. 1981) include lengthy accounts of patterns of consumption in food, textiles and housing, which have been followed up by the Annales school of historians (see also Elias 1978; Sombart 1967 for alternative traditions). A variety of recent studies provide a glimpse o possible alternatives to the hegmony of technology and relations of production in popular conceptions of the nature and cause of modernity. There has been no general attempt to rewrite the history of the period from a perspective based on changes in consumption and material culture (though see Mukerji 1983), but two examples may be suggestive, the first derived from historians and the second from studies of material culture.

Several recent works on British history have examined the development of craft production, consumption and the increase in material culture, with volumes concentrating upon the seventeenth century (Thirsk 1978), the eighteenth century (McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb 1983), and the results of the industrial revolution in the later nineteenth century (e.g. Fraser 1981). Particularly important are a series of changes which took place prior to the development of industrial technology. The main argument is summarized by McKendrick: 'In a society in which the social distance between classes is too great to bridge, as say between a landed aristocracy and a landless peasantry, or in which the distance is unbridgeable, as in a caste society, then new patterns of increased expenditure on consumer goods are extremely difficult if not impossible to induce' (1983: 20). It follows that the break up of the ancien régime and the impact of the Enlightenment gave rise to a radical transformation of the nature of objects in society.

In a period of strong social stratification, objects tend to reflect given social hierarchies. At such a time, sumptuary laws may be passed which forbid the use of particular goods to those who are deemed to be below a certain station in life (e.g. Braudel 1981: 311; Mukerji 1983: 179-82; Sennett 1976), a form of regulation common to a large range of societies (e.g. Srinivas 1966: 16), which may be associated with limited spheres of exchange (e.g. Douglas 1967; Salisbury 1962), and restrictions on mercantile practices. The process of signification between material object and social station in this situation strives to remain relatively uncomplex and controlled. When, however, this breaks down, goods can change from being relatively static symbols to being more directly constitutive of social status. Under these altered conditions, emulation is increasingly significant as a strategy by means of which people lower in a given social hierarchy attempt to realize their aspirations towards higher status by modifying their behaviour, their dress and the kind of goods they purchase, since it now becomes possible to mistake a poor nobleman for a wealthy trader. Emulation in turn stimulates the desire to retain differentials, which often becomes based upon access to knowledge about goods and their prestige connotations. By this process, fashion emerges as the means for continuing those forms of social discrimination previously regulated by sumptuary rulings. In other words, demand for goods may flourish in the context of ambiguity in social hierarchy.

Behind the industrial revolution were a series of major historical transformations, including the abandonment of popular culture by the European elites after 1500 such that the concept of culture itself became more closely related to hierarchy, but was combined with a growth in literacy and other resources by means of which lower status groups might also gain access to the new high culture (see Burke 1978: 270 and Mukerji 1983 for pre-1800; Williams 1961 for post-1800). New exotic prestige goods were used on a much wider national and international scale, contrasting with regional and local styles, which became more consciously preserved. Inventions such as clocks, new transport systems and printing were also influential in expanding communication about such innovations and their implications.

Mukerji focuses on the early modern period of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries as marking a highly significant rise in material culture, so that peasants and ordinary town dwellers who had remarkably few personal possessions in late medieval periods (Braudel 1981: 283) were becoming familiar with many more products, and from a much wider area (Burke 1978: 2468). Following on this, the more general impact of Enlightenment ideas which questioned the legitimacy of the ancien régime allowed goods to begin to play new constitutive roles, which in turn led to a substantial rise in demand. Mukerji (1983) also challenges Weber's concentration upon the link between Protestantism and capitalism, and argues rather that this period sees the rise of both asceticism and hedonism as more explicit and abstract attitudes to goods themselves. This is closer to Simmel's arguments concerning the relationship between the rise of money as abstaction anmateral culture  specificiyMukeot di off consumption from production, but showing how it is impossible to account for the development of the latter without considering the history  te omer. s noted y Mcendric  .  t changes led to substantial shifts in the nature and pattern of demand in eighteenth-century England prior to the main developments in machine technology.

To follow this argument in more detail, it is worth turning to the product which is most intimately associated with the earliest period of the industrial revolution, that is cotton cloth. Braudel's work has a problematic tendency to regard certain societies as changeless, especially the so-called 'traditional' civilizations (e.g. 1981: 285, 312). This view stems, in part, from the difficulty in perceiving in an unfamiliar society that degree of micro-differentiation which is so important in appreciating the subtleties of consumption patterns in one's own society. Other equally influential modern forms of historiography have tended to develop still further this European ethnocentrism, with other societies viewed either as the passive victims of the European search for markets (e.g. Wallerstein 179), 0 that the rest of the world is seen as peripheral to a West-European core, or else as active players in what is still however, a story dominated by European desires (e.g. Wolf 1982).

Such histories tend to ignore the extraordinary extent and longevity of certain earlier trade patterns to which Europe itself was merely peripheral. It comes as something of a shock, therefore, to realize that there were other areas, such as South Asia, more developed in technology and the articulation between production and trade, and highly dynamic in mercantile organization, which might have possessed equal potential to have become the centre for an industrial revolution, if these factors were indeed the primary causative variables (Perlin 1983). One of the problems the European traders encountered early on in their attempt to develop longer trade routes, was that peoples in South-East Asia who produced spices highly regarded in Europe did not, for their part, show any great desire for European products. Britain could only obtain these goods by intervening in an already well-established trading pattern, taking much-desired cotton cloth from South Asia and using this to purchase spices from the East Indies.

One effect of this intended trade in spices was the probably largely unintended arrival in Britain of quantities of South Asian calicoes. These were of a markedly superior quality to anything which could be produced in Europe at the time; indeed, by comparison, the British had not by then developed any significant dyeing technology. South Asian calicoes in both silk and, later on, cotton became an increasingly desirable commodity in Britain, first as a luxury item but subsequently as a widely used material. Britain had perhaps never faced such a large demand for a product which, since cotton could not be grown in the country, it was incapable of producing itself. A previous influx of linen in the sixteenth century had been countered by government sponsorship of the linen industry and the growing of coarse flax and hemp, part of a larger tendency in Britain towards the development of local projects to counter foreign imports (Thirsk 1978: 72-4). The industrial revolution, which began with machinery for cotton textile production, should therefore be understood, in part, as an exercise in import-substitution (Chaudhuri 1978; Mukerji 1983: 210-42). By means of an unprecedented policy of increasing its manufacturing efficiency through technology, and putting pressure on South Asia to export raw cotton, a trade which it had never previously engaged in, at the expense of calico, which was subject to high import duties, Britain was able to turn the tide against India, and later to flood that area with cheap cotton goods.

The impact of this arrival of South Asian calico can only be understood in terms of those wider social changes already referred to. London was a crucial site for such developments, since with a population of 900,00o it was unique in the Europe of 1800 (McKendrick 1983: 21). During the eighteenth century, the older categories of difference in goods, that is locality, occupation and so forth, appear to have become overwhelmed by more flexible and creative differences. McKendrick provides examples of the hundreds of hairstyles on offer in 1772, or a pattern book for garments with 1,370 designs. Textiles are admirably suited to the dictates of fashion, which guarantees continuous demand (1983: 34-99), and the same period saw the rise of women's fashion magazines (1983: 47). In this period there was also a retailing boom; by 1817 there were 153 fashion shops in London's Oxford Street. Certain social groups began to be regarded as consumer target populations. Plumb (1983: 289-315) and Forty (1986: 63-91) document the rise of goods aimed at specific consumer roups uch  cildren, laterdevelope as youth roups demanding particular age-based products.

In complementary essays on Josiah Wedgwood, McKendrick (1983: 10045) and Forty (1986: 13-41) chart the strategies which fostered new patterns of emulation and marketing, and the birth of the modern professional designer. Forty suggests that the attraction of the neo-classical, which emerged from a somewhat wider range as the most successful of Wedgewood's styles, was that it provided an acceptable facade for the introduction of the advances being made by ceramic science, the most modern techniques thereby being employed in the improvement of reproductions, a tension in commercial styling which has been strongly asserted ever since.

Once again, it is striking that these transformations, which include the development of many of the forms of marketing, design and istributioncharacteristic  mass production,curred before these of machinery in this industry. They were principally organizational, being based on handmade products. With this in mind, the new findings of scholars working in the Marxist tradition to show the importance of putting-out systems of production such as the Verlag in proto-industrialization, take on a new significance (e.g. Kriedte et al. 1981:101-7). The Verlag system is one in which patterns may be supplied by merchants to household-based manufacturers from a wide variety of markets, and are then copied by people who have no direct contact with these markets. This system is finely attuned to new ventures in marketing and distribution, and is probably quite similar to the major South Asian forms of production which had previously established the foundations for large-scale international trade, in the absence of industrial machinery; although, in that case, divisions in the production process, which allowed for control by merchants and middlemen, were more closely articulated by social divisions such as caste and purdah.

Machine-based production began, not only in textiles, but in a range of goods which were particularly sensitive to this type of flexible demand, and only later on concentrated on the heavier industrial goods we now particularly associate with factory-based machine production (McKendrick 1983: 31-2). It is these goods which provided the material for the 'nation of shopkeepers' image of Britain held by her contemporaries. In other areas where similar changes occurred at a slightly later date, the rise of mass material culture and retailing was the subject of some incisive commentary. The aura of the emerging high street was captured by Simmel and Baudelaire and later reconstructed by Benjamin in his arcades project (1983). The processes of emulation and democratization were to extend these into the large department stores as harbingers of the modern retailing world of today (Fraser 1981; Miller 1981). Recent work by Williams (1982) in analysing a dynamic and important debate about the nature of consumption in France suggests that a century ago there was a far more balanced view of changes in the relationship between consumption and production as historical transformation than exists today. There is an explicit concern in the writings of Zola, Gide, and Tarde, not only with the effect of mass consumption, but also with the proper response of the worker as consumer. These authors were situated within a more active public debate centered on displays such as the world fairs (Benedict ed. 1983) and movements such as the consumer cooperatives and programmes for a 'socialism of consumption' (Williams 1982: 28798)

Criticisms have already been made in chapter 3 of Marx's tendency to overemphasize production as opposed to consumption, but this was in relation to abstract theory. It is interesting to note a similar problem with attempts to put some of his ideas into practice. An illustrative case may be found in the work and practical impact of William Morris, who sought not only to recognize but also to ameliorate the social and aesthetic impact of the machine, partly under the influence of socialist ideas. Through the emergence of the arts and crafts movement, Morris succeeded in establishing a craft tradition in which the individual could retain some control over every stage of manufacture from design to execution, and thereby gain a far more satisfactory relationship with the product. Unfortunately, because this tradition tended to ignore the problem of consumption, the main impact of this craft revival was to promote a conspicuous handmade image, explicitly separate from the products of mass consumption, and immediately recognized as a quality or luxury product which signified, and thereby helped reproduce, the new moneyed elites. The impact of Morris's ideas as channelled through the sphere of consumption, provided an effective means for the further development of precisely those class differences which in turn helped reproduce the conditions for the exploitation of labour. Given the history of socialist economies, it is doubtful whether even a far more radical and complete transformation of the relations of production would, of itself, have removed this basis for class differentiation, and for this reason Morris remains a problematic model for contemporary socialism.

The second example of how the historical transformations underpinning modern society may be examined from unconventional perspectives which emphasize consumption as well as production comes from a series of studies in American historical archaeology. These have been concerned with documenting changes in American colonial society, from its inception to recent times, through the analysis of material culture, mainly derived from archaeological excavations, but also from extant buildings. A summary of the main argument is provided in a slim volume by Deetz (1977) who compares changes in pottery, gravestone design, and house construction, with asides on music and eating patterns, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (see also Glassie 1975; Leone 1984).

At the start of the period, following the traditions of Stuart yeomanry, custom demanded a mainly communal use of a variety of household materials, with pottery playing only a minor role, mainly in dairying. From 1660 onwards, pottery was more frequently used in food preparation and consumption, and there was the first ceremonial use of plates in parlour display. After 1760, mass produced English wares were in use, with a large increase in plates, cups, saucers and chamber pots. These marked a shift from communal use to individual use, although individual items were connected at a household level by a common pattern, as found in the modern set of china. Gravestones also underwent a three-phase change. In the early period the death's head was the predominant motif used in churchyard-based cemeteries, in which by no means every individual received a grave marker. Through stylistic development, the death's head was gradually transmuted into a cherub in line with the revivalist period of Christianity, and inscriptions show a concern to separate the mortal body and immortal soul. By the third period, there was a new fashion for urn and willow motifs, which had become commemorative symbols on graves marking the achievements  the ndividual in e.Such motis were particularly common in well-ordered separate family cemeteries.

The next etmaterals, house forms, has been most fuly studby Glassie in an analysis of eighteenth-century extant folk housing in Middle Virginia. These dwellings belonged to the poorer white small holders, and were built without consultation with architects or planners. Through a sophisticated structural analysis of features ranging from window position to door latch, Glassie reconstructs a major change taking place around the late 1870s (1975: 182, 185), in which chimneys and central halls became incorporated into the main building, and a new concern with symmetry appears, along with a homogenization of the exterior around a more conspicuously ordered façade. Similar analyses indicating new ordering principles have been car ut  he ardens socats Leo  uni, the disposal of rubbish and forms of cutlery (Deetz 1977). Overall, the stud mark the ergence  what has been called the Georgian style, which employs bilateral symmetry, the individualization of personal space and property, and the specification of discrete elements reunited in a cohesive unity. The style is interpreted as a new form of conservatism based on an alliance between poorer white farmers and an aristocracy beleaguered by a combination of factors, including a fall in tobacco prices, a rise in slavery, and a shift in local identity.

Whatever the particular context of such changes, these studies demonstrate that a set of transformations in material culture which may be found to permeate almost every trivial domain, from chimneys to rubbish disposal, can be understood as a largely unconscious and unintentional response by a variety of social groups, which produced new forms of demand and new means of incorporating the emergence of mass produced items. Many of the familiar aspects of modernization, such as a rise of individualism and of specification in material culture use and scientific-rational order, may be traced in these studies, but the evidence provides a means of analysing such changes in terms of the structural organization of everyday objects for the population as a whole, and acts as a balance to the more common literary and self-reflective accounts of these changes. This balance is important, since, for example, some accounts whose critical focus is the rise of the individual, private, property-owning self, almost appear to conspire with that reification of the self which they seek to criticize in contemporary culture, by isolating and concentrating on this single factor. In these studies, by contrast, this transformation is understood as one of a whole series of cultural changes, heading towards new forms of abstraction and specificity. From certain unusual perspectives, history may therefore complement the standard picture of the industrial revolution to provide a basis for the study of the mass consumption which dominates contemporary life.

## Studies of Contemporary Consumption

Several of the more extensive areas of analysis of modern consumption will be dealt with quite briefly, since they lie largely outside of the scope of the present work. First, and perhaps most bizarre, is the field entitled design history. As conventionally studied, this is clearly intended to be a form of pseudo art history, in which the task is to locate great individuals such as Raymond Loewy or Norman Bel Geddes and portray them as the creators of modern mass culture. The analysis is usually based on the strict modernism which was the ideology of the professions involved, and is epitomized in comments such as 'we seem to find that the aesthetics of an industrial product will take care of themselves automatically after we have provided a balance between function, simplicity and utility' (Bayley 1979: 71). This approach has recently been subject to an effective critique by Forty (1986), who points out that designers have always been handmaidens to the business interests they serve, and to separate them out as self-determined arbiters of cultural form is even less convincing than in the case of high art which strives for such autonomy. In effect this design history is a study of the industrial artefact which quite ignores the consumer. A more recent critical tradition in this field, as in the journal Block, provides an alternative approach much more closelyncrne wih he ocal context  cultualvation.Foy provides abundant examples of the complex manner in which commerce developed new goods around perceived divisions in the domesticity, science and modernity which become enshrined in and reproduced through the appearance of everyday objects, although again the transformation of goods in consumption is largely ignored.

Within anthropology, there has always been a tradition seeking to locate underlying and generalizable processes and patterns in material culture studies. Kroeber and his followers devoted considerable effort to studies ranging from changes in skirt length over several decades to the diffusion and diversity of artefact styles amongst Californian Indians (Kroeber 1939). More recently, studies of modern objects by archaeologists working in the sub-discipline of ethno-archaeology have sought to provide 'general and testable' laws of stylistic behaviour, strongly influenced by an extreme and exquisitely inappropriate form of positivism which took hold of the discipline in the 196Ös, and appears to have been retained long after most other social sciences threw off its shackles (e.g. Binford 1972; 1978; Gould and Schiffer eds 1981, see Hodder 1982a and b for a critique). Such studies exemplify the kind of fetishism to which material culture studies are always prone, when people are superseded as the subject of investigation by objects, and become essentially labels for their movement or pattern.

By far the most extensive research into the relationship between society and mass consumption objects has been conducted in the world of commerce itself, and its offshoots in marketing and advertising, which are strongly linked to the discipline of economics. In common with ethno-archaeology, such research tends towards an abstract positivism, using complex mathematical models to predict the behaviour of certain social groups in response to a new product. Societies are divided, not only by conventional sociological categories such as occupation and housing, but also in relation to psychological attitudes and other aspects of known consumer performance. There is a large number of books and journals devoted to different aspects of such research, which may be employed, though with some caution, for other purposes (e.g. Engel et al. 1973; Crimp 1981). Conventional economic approaches to consumption tend towards a macro-scale of analysis whose assumptions about the nature of society, demand, and the actual relationship between goods and people can generally be reduced to certain highly simplistic and dubious notions, with the social demand for goods being replaced by the quite insufficient symbolic equation with price. Douglas and Isherwood (1978) provide a useful and informed critique of this literature.

At one level, the total separation of such research from anthropology is quite artificial, given that these studies are often directly parallel to anthropological concerns with social organization and stratification. There are, however, highly specific concerns in business-oriented research, which limit its more general interest. First, it is almost always concerned with the point of sale; there is no reason for researchers to be concerned with the social value and longer term implications of products. Secondly, business studies tend to affirm a consumer passivity in response to marketing initiatives. People working in these professions often take pleasure in describing a sales campaign in which surplus stocks of milk were dispersed by persuading the public that it had a taste for a new mass product, such as yoghurt, or in reminding us that ploughman's lunches could be invented to persuade a new group to patronize pubs. Such stories, and they are legion, are quite accurate with respect to the intention and perspective of business and marketing interests, but it will be argued in the next chapter that they may be a poor foundation for an understanding of the nature of consumption. Business literature is therefore vital for understanding business, which is one of the major forces in modern culture, but it is more limited when it comes to a study of the consumer and his or her relation to the object. Connected with these studies, though quite different in emphasis, is the rise of consumer protection and associated legislation, which is more concerned with the implications of goods, but tends to be restricted to functional efficiency and safety, rather than wider social relations.

One approach which is curiously similar to business studies in its view of the populace is that of some contemporary Marxism. This tradition tends to focus upon mass consumption as the instrument of capital for which the individual subject is created as consumer, and provides important critical accounts of the mechanisms by which producers construct their markets (e. g. Haug 1986). Capital is devoted to the creation of desires and needs which can only be fulfilled by the latest developments of the market. Needs are always related back to capitalism's demand for the social reproduction of its labour force. Preteceille and Terrail (1985) provide a recent elaboration of this position, taking into account the various approaches emerging from cultural anthropology, but they retain the classic Marxist conception that modern 'needs' can only be accounted for in terms of the search by capital for greater profits, and that consumption is always subservient to production interests (e.g. 1985: 37-81). In many current studies, it is the state which is abstracted as the complementary prime mover in the development of new collective forms of consumption (e.g. Castells 97), and largely functionalist arguments are derived to indicate how any changes which appear to have occurred can always be found to have accorded with the 'interests' of as state monopoly capitalism' and always in direct conflict with the interests of the population as a whole.

A modern twist to the Marxist critique of the commodity has emerged with the application of semiotics. Although often associated with structuralism, semiotic analysts is involved in the details of representation and signification, while structuralism proper eschewed this concern with a drive towards more abstract models of cognition and culture. The results of the application of these techniques have been varied. Sometimes objects are perceived merely as alternatives to words, as signs to be used in pseudo-linguistic formal analysis. In the hands of writers such as Barthes (1973) semiotic analysis becomes an extension of the critique of the commodity and bourgeois culture, a series of denunciations Barthes termed 'semioclasm'. Objects are analysed as myths which provide artificial resolutions to real contradictions in society. The process of signification is what accomplishes the task of the myth; it subverts simple denotation through its wider connotation, it naturalizes culture as the given order of the day, and it utilizes the ambiguities and tendencies of the process of signification itself in order to effect its apparent closures.

In the later development of Barthes' work, and in the work of others who followed similar trajectories (e.g. Coward and Ellis 1977), this analysis moves further from the specific contents of the objects and their social impact, to address the problem of the media itself, and the nature of the sign. The older style of semiotic analysis is replaced by the post-structuralist tradition in which the subject is constructed in terms of a larger discourse, and analysis is devoted to topics such as narrative structure and deconstruction. In chapter 9, this will be reviewed in relation to the earlier critique of mass culture.

In opposition to the above studies are those which have been carried out by anthropologists, who have applied traditions more central to that discipline. One of the most important recent examples of such a study was the result of joint work by an anthropologist and an economist, and focused on critical appraisal of many of the assumptions about goods current in economics (Douglas and Isherwood 1980). In this work, rather than being reduced to utility or competitive status display, goods are examined in terms of their expressive and symbolic function, and the central thesis with respect to this is one which has largely been assumed in the present work. The references by Douglas and Isherwood to conventional economics are complemented by Sahlins' critique of similar assumptions in Marxist economics (1976a), which in part extends the work of

Baudrillard; and both of these works use symbolic analysis in order to attempt more general assessments of the relationship between divisions of goods and divisions of peoples.

The work of Douglas and Isherwood may be related to that Durkheimian pre-structuralist tradition which sees objects as aiding in the creation of a cognitive order based upon social divisions. They argue that goods are used to make 'visible and stable the categories of culture' (1980: 59). These cognitive categories are, however, themselves derived from a deeper base: social structure. Thus, 'It would seem then that the clue to finding real partitioning amongst goods must be to trace some underlying partitioning in society' (1980: 907). The authors' stress on cognition has the advantage that it leads to an appreciation of the importance of the distribution of knowledge about what goods should represent, rather than merely of the distribution of the goods themselves. They tend, however, towards what Sahlins has castigated as a 'sociability fetishism' (1976a: 120), in which social structure is often treated as both prior to, and ontologically superior to, its appearance in goods.

Despite his critique of Douglas, Sahlins' own attempt to construct an approach to consumption (1976a: 166-204) is subject to quite similar limitations. In their enthusiasm to criticize economistic assumptions concerning utility, both works tend to overstress the autonomy of the features they assert. The result is that in perhaps, too stark contrast to the approaches above, they entirely ignore the interests and power of commercial institutions. They tend to assert the overwhelming desire for cognitive order, and thus offer an unrealistically cohesive model of cognition itself which ignores the problems of ideology and framing. Most importantly, they fail to acknowledge the genuine lessons of Marx's work, as, for example, reflected in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice (1977), in which the significance of artefacts is seen to consist in their simultaneous operation in both the material and cognitive worlds, thereby exposing the artificiality of a dichotomous approach. In short, these anthropologists tend towards several of the dualisms which the concept of objectification has been used to oppose, while nevertheless providing important assertions and exemplifications of the process of consumption as culture.

An ethnographically-based study set in Chicago (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton 1981) provides an example of a very different approach to an anthropology of consumption. This work is based on the examination of the goods used by some three hundred individuals in eighty-two households. The limitations of this study as an approach to consumption in general derive not only from a rather unbalanced subjectivism in the authors' theoretical models, but also from the particular selection of objects of concern. The analysis undertake i not ogoods in eneral, but of those electeas the most 'cherished' possessions by the informants. Not surprisingly, the pattern of reasons given for such a selection tends to be highly personal and particular, with emphasis being placed mainly on the objectification of personal relations, for example, with deceased friends and relatives. The self to whose development the authors relate this process tends to be a highly individualist subjective self, of the psychological rather than the anthropological tradition, with given psychic needs. Although Simmel is quoted, there is none of the subtlety of his analysis of the necessary contradictions of industrial society, and the emphasis on goals of happy homes and cohesive families appears cut off from the wider realms of social action. A far more satisfactory, if idiosyncratic, account of the cultural contexts within which modern commodities operate is provided by Appadurai (1986), especially in the introduction to this varied set of essays and examples, which follows from traditional anthropological concern with the nature of exchange.

## Consumption as Social Differentiation

After these relatively brief accounts of a variety of approaches to the study of consumption as a social phenomenon, one particular perspective demands more substantial resumé and analysis. This perspective is here distilled out of the similarities between two major studies of consumption, one of which may almost be credited with initiating such studies, while the other provides the most extensive contemporary survey. These are Bourdieu's recent book Distinction (1984) and Veblen's The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899, here 1970). Although the former makes no mention of the latter, and despite a number of differences, the two share certain central assumptions.

One of the distinctions between these two works is that Veblen's goal is more limited; he is not concerned with consumption in general so much as a specific type of consumption which was of particular importance in the period during which he was writing, a period which may be seen as marking the transition to the age of mass consumption. Veblen, like Simmel, had the advantage of seeing as new and shocking many phenomena of mass consumption which today are regarded as commonplace and natural. Veblen's particular interest in the leisure class determined the direction of his argument. Leisure is to be understood as the ability to absent oneself from work. Thus, for a particular segment of the rich it was less wealth per se which was of importance, than wealth displayed as a conspicuous distance from the world of practical necessity. The class of people for whom this may have been of paramount importance was not the traditional aristocracy which had never been involved in work, having merely inherited their estates, but those termed the nouveaux riches, the use of which term implies a much more direct involvement in the work process as the basis for capital accumulation.

Veblen portrays this class as determined to create a distance between themselves and that world of necessity which was the foundation of their fortune. They also desired to emulate that other class for whom time and birth had provided legitimacy, and for whom wealth appeared as a natural attribute rather than a possibly transient accretion. The rise of industrial work processes and domestic labour, both of which appeared as particularly servile pursuits, only encouraged the capitalists' desire to distance themselves from their origins. However, just as they had formerly worked to obtain their fortune, so also the nouveaux riches were obliged to employ material goods to assert their social pretensions.

It was this nouveaux riches strategy which so jarred with those such as Veblen who had been raised on the more general American ethic that work itself was a highly moral activity in which pride should be taken, as in the case of Weber's Protestant ethic which valued utility and austerity. Veblen's achievement was to capture the strategies of the leisure class in a series of classic phrases and categories and exemplify them clearly and in detail with a masterful sense of irony. He showed that the mere absence from work or possession of wealth was translated into highly exaggerated forms which he termed conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure. The individual being insufficient for the expression of these values, they might be extended in vicarious forms such as footservants who had nothing to do but to display their own superfluity, or pets, which provided surfaces for the further display of luxury.

As well as outlining the ways in which the leisure class expressed their status, Veblen clarified the two major means by which such strategies were extended into society in general. The first of these was through control over matters of taste. Good taste became associated with the expression of distance from the world of work, the practical l    ul dissociated from that which could be regarded as cheap' (1970: 112). This became extended through the process of emulation, by which lower groups in the hierarchy sought to copy the higher groups, a ratgndenal that Vebl believ   e ounat for the concept of private property (1970: 3-40). In America, where there was a comparative absence of a long term aristocracy, these social hierarchies took on a particularly strong pecuniary emphasis. Through these processes the leisure class, which might itself represent but a small fraction of society, could extend its influence over the whole. Wealth was, however, not the only factor discussed by Veblen, and it is of particular interest that he ends his account of the leisure class with a chapter on The higher learning as an expression of pecuniary culture', and with an emphasis on Classics as the key at that time to the concept of high culture. Unfortunately, Veblen's emphasis upon particular strategies related to very particular segments of the population has tended to become generalized in popular accounts as a basis for understanding consumption per se (Douglas and Isherwood 1979: 4)

The tradition which links Veblen and Bourdieu is evident in their mutual emphasis on the area of taste as the key dimension controlling the significance of ordinary goods, and their common location of the source of taste in distance from work. Bourdieu, though less witty and stylish, achieves a large number of advances over Veblen's account in terms of the sophistication of his analysis and his ability to move this critique away from the characterization of a particular segment of the population to the analysis of French society as a whole, and from simple emulation and display to complex forces of strategy and social reproduction. These moves are necessary, given both the democratization of mass consumption and the growth in sophistication and subtlety of the ideological practices of dominant groups in the intervening period.

Bourdieu's first task is to rescue taste as preference from essentialist doctrines of aesthetics, and thereby free it as a potential tool for the contingent historical analysis of society. He achieves this by taking a central pillar in this tradition, Kant's concept of the aesthetic as distanced contemplation which transcends the immediacy of experience, and demonstrating that this is only a single perspective, that of the dominant class. The Kantian aesthetic is one of refusal, a forgoing of the immediate pleasure of the sensual and the evident in favour of a cultivated and abstracted appropriation through an achieved understanding. It therefore tends towards a rejection of representation of the signified or naturalistic, in favour of the principles of convention, the esoteric and formal. The overt display of wealth and consumption by Veblen's leisure class is challenged by a more subtle, detached and inconspicuous form to be appreciated only by those sufficiently cultivated or civilized. It is an aesthetic clearly expressed in the cool, detached and 'difficult' forms of modern art.

The Kantian aesthetic achieves its meaning only by contrast to what Bourdieu terms an anti-Kantian aesthetic. This is the aesthetic of popular culture, a preference for immediate entertainment, pleasure, the gut feeling, a regard for the sensual and the representational. Here, it is the substance and the signified which are of importance. A telling illustration resulted from questions concerning suitable subjects for photography. The Kantian perspective prefers cabbages and a car crash, the anti-Kantian favours sunset and first communion (Bourdieu 1984: 34-41). For the former, beauty is created through the mode of representation; for the latter, it is inherent in the subject. These differences in taste, which are equally evident in a wide range of media - for example, a preference for 'difficult' as opposed to popular music - provide the basis for unearthing a deep classificatory device which Bourdieu identifies as an example of that 'habitus' described in chapter 6.

As habitus, this distinction between the Kantian and anti-Kantian aesthetic is both derived from material conditions, and in turn provides an insight into a classificatory scheme which may be applied to an infinite number of actual material and consumption domains. The term 'taste' provides a clue to its deep rooted nature. When faced with what we regard as consummately bad taste, or people who seem to revel in exactly the behaviour we abhor, we often feel revolted, nauseous or acutely embarrassed, as when parents say the wrong thing in front of a child's peers, or that child is forced to wear clothes whose image he or she rejects.

When mapping these differences in taste, the sociological criterion used by Bourdieu tends to be either occupation or educational level, but both are related to the common conception of class, as upper, middle and working. Taste is then seen principally as the cause of 'classism', which can be defined as the kind of distate the middle and upper classes feel for the vulgar in fun fairs, cheap commodities, artificial copies, or lack of style, and the contempt working people feel for the pretentious, cold and degenerate middle and upper classes.

The source for the basic difference in taste is traced by Bourdieu to the different experiences of these classes in modern society. The immediacy of working people's tastes derives from the immediacy of their work experience, and the pressure imposed by their needs. A person who provides manual labour, and whose access to the basics of sustenance and comfort is not guaranteed, has a respect and desire for the sensual, physical and immediate. An individual who has been brought up in the abstractions of education and capital, and who is certain of obtaining daily necessities, cultivates a distance from these needs, and affects a taste based in the respect and desire for the abstract, distanced and formal. These objective conditions are interiorized through habitus as desire expressed in taste. Habitus thereby mediates between material conditions including, but not of the social group.

Although in Veblen's time dominant groups could flaunt their birth or wealth, these were already undergoing the crises of legitimacy indicated in the venom of Veblen's writings. Much of Bourdieu's work in Distinction and other books is concerned with how these legitimatory principles have been replaced by others based on the education system." Education is used to support current social differences, since it claims to generate distinctions based on merit rather than birth or wealth, being itself the means by which differential ability entied Alon with oher ociologist . Goldthorpe et al. 1980; Halsey, Heath and Ridge 1980) who have used statistical analyses of education and occupation óver several generations to question assumptions concerning increased social mobility, Bourdieu is able to demonstrate the largely illusory nature of this claim (1984: 135-68). The rise of mass education saw a decline in social mobility and merely an inflation in employers' demands for qualifications.

The basis for education's ability to bring about this process of social reproduction lies in what Bourdieu terms cultural capital. Cultural capital is based on time invested in obtaining certain kinds of knowledge. Learning Classics or memorizing the year by year achievements of a football club will enhance the individual's reputation in certain environments, but will prove a poor investment if used in the wrong circumstances. Bourdieu's main original contribution to analyses of education is to distinguish between that which is directly inculcated in the education process and that which is indirectly absorbed.

Some capital may be obtained through direct transference, as when an acquired skill for keeping in touch with the latest developments and information in a given academic field is then applied to the world of fashion. Less obvious is Bourdieu's evidence that education fosters a general tendency towards the use of high culture. His surveys indicate that the likelihood of visiting the theatre, art galleries or museums will depend not upon subjects studied or grades of qualification achieved, but simply upon the length of time spent in a higher academic institution.

One possible reason for this relationship between education and culture is brought out especially clearly in an earlier article by Bourdieu (1968). The increasing abstraction of modern art has tended to extend this distance from the immediacy of forms, and to make such art increasingly difficult to interpret for those not familiar with the conventions and history of the field. This is true for abstract modern theatre, painting, avant-garde music, literature and so forth. In a sense, if cultural products are regarded as a code which must be interpreted, this code has become increasingly difficult to decipher without access to some key. Education, on the other hand, has become increasingly important as a discriminating variable, that is, in terms of the level of education achieved. It also provides the key to the translation of high culture by emphasizing the importance of attaining knowledge about abstract and esoteric subjects. Thus, the difficulty of deciphering the cultural code has been compounded by the difficulty of gaining access to the devices for its decoding. These two factors act together to create and reproduce social hierarchy. At the top of the scale there is a close relationship with high avant-garde arts and esoteric social theories, the best current example of which is the elationsh tween t-odenismn -tructuralism Foster ed. 1983).

The relationship between the two kinds of capital - cultural and economic - is uneasy. On the one hand, education provides a means by which business capital may reproduce its social order. The children of the rich may work in health food shops or other faddish and esoteric pursuits which utilize their educational experience and may provide a more acceptable form of class reproduction than simple inheritance. There is, however, also an antagonism between the two orders, as the holders of cultural capital deride money capital as mere wealth and its conspicuous expressions as high vulgarity, while the holders  money apial regar the pretensions ndoteic forso high cultural capital as parasitic and irrelevant. In modern British society, this often takes the form of a left-right political division between fractions of the upper classes. Bourdieu's own analysis of politics, however, stresses rather the division between the 'knows' and the 'don't knows' in relation to the pressure put on the general public to have an informed opinion on often very distant issues (1984: 397-465).

Society, then, is not to be understood in terms of a simple hierarchy, but as a continual struggle over the hierarchy of hierarchies; that is, whether, in this case, that of wealth should prevail over that of knowledge. In a sense, this is the modern version of ancient struggles between church, state, military and trading concerns, and the continuance of the French court traditions studied by Elias att  oc  p proper source for social reputation and status. In the main, the holders of cultural capital can be regarded as the dominated fraction of the dominant class.

Although the examples above related to the arts, the importance of using the concept of taste is that it applies equally to the world of mass consumption. Bourdieu provides a fascinating array of domains divided according to the criteria of taste. An obvious case is that of food, which may be graded according to the social position of the consumer. Working people are found to prefer the immediacy of abundance,a plentiful table proclaiming it sustenance, strong red meats, solid breads and cheeses, an unfussy array of quantity wherever possible. Middle class food becomes cuisine. Taste is here based on knowledge of the proper methods of preparing and presenting foods, and there is a moral interest in food as wholesome, healthy and sustaining. Food for higher classes is increasingly split between the two fractions of the dominant class. The food associated with economic capital is characterized by rich sauces and desserts, and rare and luxurious items such as truffles. The ultimate food for the display of cultural capital today is the nouvelle cuisine, which refuses any suggestion that food might be for sustenance, a minimalist food which emphasizes the aesthetic of presentation, an austere but cultivated pleasure.

A similar set of divisions can be identified in a vast range of goods. The midle-class children's toy is never intended for mere amusement or pleasure; its prime interest is its educational value, the child must absorb the toy as a challenge, something from which it will learn in order to improve itself. Similarly, there is an array of products for producing the body beautiful, a tall elegant figure disdainful of practical or even biological constraint. In every consumer domain, fashion provides opportunities for differentiation, in terms of speed of access to knowledge. Through such examples, it becomes clear how the habitus acts both to generate the diversity of forms and, in turn, to classify these same diverse fields. It provides a set of dispositions promoting self-recognition and the creation of relationships such as friendships and marriages with others who share that set of prejudices concerning the correct nature of things; but the individuals concerned rarely possess any awareness of the social origins of these tastes.

It is this structuralist mode, through which the particularities of the object world at a given time may help generate the objectifications by which a set of social relationships comes to know itself through an array of everyday taxonomies which makes Bourdieu's work such an advance on previous analyses of consumption. It accounts for the way in which goods not merely reflect distinction, but are an instrument of it. It indicates the power and importance of consumption trivia, both in everyday social encounters and at the level of meta-social alignments. Bourdieu's habitus is as deeply rooted in material culture as in cognitive orders and social divisions, and it provides the means for combining an approach to all three. It also accounts for the extraordinary ability of shoppers to select from a huge array those goods most appropriate to themselves and their close friends or relatives.

As a modern social analyst, Bourdieu is exemplary in his refusal to reduce his model of society to any single social attribute. Although he often uses occupation and length of time in educational institutions as the axes for his displays and charts, in the text he attempts to encompass a far greater range of differences based on gender, age and expectation. He clearly regards these as always interconnected; the meaning of gender depends upon one's class, and vice versa. He provides a polythetic perspective on social position, exhibiting the structuralist preference for relationships over entities, so that all social attributes are understood primarily in terms of their co-variant properties. This relational approach is opposed to Marx's theory of class, conflating a theoretically constructed concept with a given body of people defined largely by economic position; although Bourdieu recognizes that such has been the impact of Marx and Marxism that class as representation has by now been realized, through sheer symbolic efficacy, to an extraordinary degree (Bourdieu 1985).

Bourdieu also attempts a balance between relativism and moral judgement. One of the work's main strengths is that it covers all social positions. A radical lesbian whose main concerns are CND and South Africa is as likely to be placed in terms of education and occupation (e.g. teaching or social work), as the home-loving, conservative, television absorbed, do-it-yourself enthusiast might represent the aspiring white collar working class. The work is, however, clearly intended to expose the pretensions to a superior rationality of middleand upper-class taste.

Although Distinction is surely the most significant contribution to the study of consumption made by any anthropologist, and one of the major resources for obtaining a better understanding of our own culture, there are certain important limitations to the work. Perhaps the main weakness in the text, which accounts for a number of others, is the methodology employed. Despite having worked previously as an ethnographer, Bourdieu makes no attempt to employ the ethnographic method in this work, relying instead on a lengthy questionnaire reproduced at the end of the book. Although highly inventive and productive, this questionnaire can provide only explicit responses, rather than insight into actual practices, and, through processing, has created a normative characterization of the diverse social fractions involved, which are seen as an exemplars of a larger, isicl-baocass.Tel ilte in the art of living in modern society by people of all classes, and the use of ambiguities, inconsistencies, resistance, framing and such devices in individual and social strategies are thereby lost.

What is especially curious is that this questionnaire is strongly reminiscent of others which are well-established as a marketing technique, and are supplemented by actual marketing surveys. Like marketing, it classifies informants according to sociological classes combined with consumption patterns. It is not unacceptable for an academic to employ a technique developed in industry, but what is strange is that this is combined with a remarkable lack of consideration for the impact of marketing itself. However welcome Bourdieu's analysis of consumers may be when contrasted to the more common attempt to explain the same material as a simple expression of business interests, the book's impact is not enhanced by its entirely ignoring the sphere of production. Bourdieu's habitus does not spontaneously generate a world of goods, only a set of dispositions. To understand how the congruity between the two is achieved demands an investigation of marketing, designers (as by Forty 1986) and other distributive agencies. It is not sufficient merely to talk of the articulation of two independent spheres (Bourdieu 1984: 230).

Despite the striving for the autonomy of consumption activities, resulting in an exaggerated separation from business interests, in some respects Bourdieu's major source of analogy tends to fall back, not on to an economic, but perhaps on to an economistic model. Capital both economic and symbolic appears as an investment open to calculation, and social hierarchy tends to be reducible to these two main linear san ru h pal n  eplote  sl The result is very different from the ideas expressed in chapter 6, where it was suggested that one of the many results of the rise of matral culture a mod cultural form was i abiliy t multly and keep apart a plethora of hierarchies and diverse spheres.

Also surprising, given Bourdieu's work as an ethnographer in Algeria, is the lack of consideration for the nature of mass consumption as an historical phenomena. The world of Distinction is 'given', and the sense of modernity as a dynamic form found in the writings of Simmel (1978) or Berman (1983) is quite absent. As a result, the corresponding differences between these societies are not underlined, and this ahistorical representation lends itself to a simplification of both subject and object. The subject as agent of strategy appears as highly constrained and normative. The actual complexities of modern working-class life, the use of distancing or parody, as emerges, for example, from studies of popular culture, is lost in the drive for a consistent congruence through habitus engendered by class interests and constrained possibilities. Working people are reduced to a relationship of immediacy from which they cannot escape. This is much less subtle than the characterization of strategy given in Bourdieu's Outline of a Theory of Practice, and is consistent with a simplification of the concept of the object. Despite the exemplary use of material culture as evidence, there is no discussion of its nature and growth as compared to other media.

Distinction tends to revert to a notion of objectification which consists mainly in the external sedimentation and subsequent reproduction of class interests. To locate objects in relation to interest and power, however sophisticated and non-reductionist, is only one perspective upon mass consumption. Other aspects of culture are ignored. The problems of alienation and estrangement are reduced to problems of access to knowledge. Projects based on religion, morals, the nature of the self and so forth cannot be fully incorporated within this framework. The focus on class fragments is, however, often based less on the problem of exploitation than on a Romantic vision of the working class as an authentic humanity, whose sensuality and desires are preferable and proper. Ironically, such a view rests on an aestheticization of labour. Bourdieu implies the same Romantic preference for the work ethic and antipathy towards abstraction as Veblen. As in many similar Romantic writings on the left of the political spectrum, the working class is considered authentic by virtue of precisely those attributes which have been forced upon it by oppression from above. Despite his structuralist methodology (and abstract style of writing), Bourdieu does not appear to perceive the neccessary relationship between abstraction and specificity and the contradictory nature of modern culture brought out by Simmel.

For these reasons, however valuable Bourdieu's work may be in identifying the patterns and relationships of the society of mass consumption, it is limited with respect to the present project. Distinction does not provide a theory of either consumption or material culture as the form of modern culture. Many of the areas most fully developed theoretically in Bourdieu's earlier work are simplified in the interests of achieving an understanding of the underlying structure of such a complex phenomenon as modern French society as a totality.

When Bourdieu's approach is set against the range of other cies become evident. Some approaches, including the conventional account of the industrial revolution, certain Marxist analyses and business-oriented researches, appear to emphasize productive forces as the prime mover, and are concerned with consumption only as the outcome of capitalist interests and the problem of ensuring that desire and demand correspond with the needs of industry. Other approaches, including those of Douglas and Bourdieu, are concerned with consumers themselves as groups with interests, both cognitive and material, which are projected in patterns of objects, and in this case it is industry which is seen as handmaiden to the pattern of consumer group demands.

This difference is crosscut by one of the major questions addressed by Bourdieu in his earlier work (1977) but largely ignored in Distinction, which is the balance between objectivist approaches such as those found in archaeology, and subjectivist approaches, the most extreme of which would be design history or the study of Chicago homes. The intention of the next chapter is to examine, through actual cases of consumption, the means by which some balance may be achieved between the relevant factors. What, however, should already be evident as a result of both the historical and anthropological materials investigated in this chapter is that, just as with material culture in general, in many social studies (with the conspicuous exception of economics) a stress on consumption is a necessary corollary to its previous neglect. The development of a study of consumption may then be integrated, not as dichotomous to relations of production, nor as a universal social function, but as a continually growing element of modern culture, which must therefore play an increasingly prominent role in attempts to understand the nature of contemporary societies.
