> 来源：Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,\Material Culture and Mass Consumption (Social Archaeology) -- Miller, Daniel, 1954- -- Social archaeology, Oxford, OX, UK, New York, NY,.md
> 识别方式：一级标题

# Object Domains, Ideology and Interests

## Material Ideology

Bourdieu's Distinction, in common with several other approaches to consumption, such as that of semiotics, is largely based upon the mapping of differences between goods on to differences between social groups, which, in the more reductionist instances, are often treated as prior social divisions unaltered by this process of signification. An alternative approach, which will be adopted in this chapter, is to concentrate rather on the possibility of identifying divisions which pertain to particular object domains and which may not be consistent with any cohesive representation of society. In such cases, the significance of the social divisions associated with objects is most evident from the study of the goods themselves.

Within such an approach, objects may not be reducible to the workings of a central hierarchical principle, or be directly related to what are otherwise considered the most important social divisions. In at least one example, the distinction between goods is more closely related to contradictions within one given set of individuals than to differences between social groups. As mass consumption, a particular array of objects may be found to represent and assist in the construction of perspectives relating to control over production or rivalry between consumers, but also to wider issues concerning morality and social ideals. As external forms, however, objects may also be independent of the interpretation of any one particular group, and their consistency as a material presence may belie the actual variety of meanings they evoke.

To set any analysis of the styles of artefacts within the social context of contemporary Britain would appear to require consideration of a wide range of agents and relevant factors. These include forms of production and comerce and the demands of profit, the interests of an constraints manucture, des, marketng  verng, whose role it is to create the images of industrial goods in relation to

specified target populations, and the interests of and constraints on the consumer population, who use and in their turn manipulate the meaning of these forms through differential selection, placement, use and association.

As an initial example, one of the most fundamental ranges of objects in contemporary British society will be examined, that is the variety of house styles found in residential developments. Fortunately, major contemporary building styles have been subject to detailed analysis in terms of their social significance. There is the work of Muthesius on the terraced house (1982), of King on the bungalow (1984), of Oliver et al. on the semi-detached house (1981), and of a multitude of authors on the leading architects of the modernist styles, which emerged as the dominant from taken by council properties.

The major distinctions emerge clearly from these accounts. On the one hand (Oliver et al. 1981: 78), there are the attributes held to be exemplified in the half-timbered, suburban, semi-detached, middleclass house: an ambivalent position in relation to town and country, an expression of individualism extended in the modern do-it-yourself tradition, a concern with compromise and a rejection of extremes, all set within statements about tradition and nationalism. Some of these are further extended in the detached bungalow analysed by King (1984), as part of an opposition to elements of modernity and urbanization which constitute the major transformations of the environment over the last two centuries. In stark opposition to the values of suburbia are the images projected by the council estate, which appears on the landscape as a powerful expression of the ideals of communality, of technological supremacy over the slum, and of modernist statements on the possibilities of present and future society, often tied to concepts of socialist planning as formulated by the Bauhaus and promoted by a number of British local councils. Muthesius documents in detail the interests of the professions involved in building streets of terraced properties: the speculators, suppliers of materials, planning controllers and architects. Jackson (1973: 145) shows that these interests were hidden by the demands of style, as in the semi-detached properties which employed a basic frame but added a spurious individuality on the façade in order to make the house more attractive to prospective buyers, or the modernist- style buildings, which proclaimed their scientific nature to the degree that elements of the internal construction which would not normally have been visible were externalized onto the façade to display a commitment to the appropriation of new technologies.

The symbolic function of the different styles present in the built environment which is the context for everyday action suggest that they might fuel an apparently active and sustained debate between suburban individualism and inner city communalism. The implication, however, that these differences represent actual conflicts in society or the emergence of competing and alternative traditions is quite false. This becomes evident when consideration is given to the processes by which these styles are produced and consumed. The modernist council properties have long been one of the strongest fiefdoms of professionalized architecture, being extremely closely linked to development planning and local political interests, and subject to the intervention of both civic authorities and the state. These links are evident in modernist style which extends also to the large blocks used for government administration and the offices of major commercial organizations. The development of this style, then, should be credited not only to architects, but to the whole range of bureaucratic and business interests, academics, developers and systems builders, and the various strata of decision makers. When taken together, these amount to a large part of one of the dominant interests of contemporary British society: the professional middle class. As a style, modernism visibly lends itself to this appropriation. It projects an ethos based upon the advances of science, the adaptation to systems technology, and the destruction of tradition, which accords well with those elements of technological dominance discussed by Habermas and his Frankfurt School predecessors in their critiques of modernist rationality and the ideology of technological efficiency.

What is curious is that the members of this same dominant group which may be held responsible for the emergence of modernist architecture, and its appropriation by the state as an authority, do not, by and large, choose family homes of their own built in this style, which is clearly incompatible with their personal desires and images. Instead, their own households are more likely to be typical of the larger examples of the detached, the semi-detached and the bungalow, which are extended, in part through emulatory processes, to other sectors of our society with similar aspirations, to such a degree that these styles virtually command modern private development. The consumption of modernist architecture as residential form is almost entirely throug state allocation. The consumers of this architecture, the council tenants, have been notoriously restricted in their ability to transform the façade of these dwellings. The suburban dwellers documented by Oliver et al. (1981), who are able to alter the appearance of their homes, tend not to use modernist styles, which, in any case, do not lend themselves to such appropriation.

What this implies is that a group of people who, as consumers, constructea and sustained this image of the individualist tradition also, as producers, constructed the very image of change, community and modernity to which it is opposed. The source of the apparent opposition between these two styles then becomes evident. Clearly, they represent a structural polarity through which the semantic power as traital,bivalent iviualisic, ais iul resonance only by contrast with modernism. To put it the other way and urbanicity that the construction of an opposite which is perceived as unchanging and surburban becomes sustainable. The representation o the interest a particularroup i greatlyclaried hat grou also able to construct an antitheticalimage or the details  hs argument see Miller 1984). King provides evidence of the power of this structural logic in his example the attempt by bungalow builders to invade' the countryside to such an extent as to threaten the forces which had, until then controlled the spatial distribution of various syls.The result was egilatin curtailg any frthe extension hi form into 'inappropriate' areas (King 1984: 18492).

This suggests that in studies of material representation it should not be assumed that the consumption of a given group will be represented as a coherent and consistent set of forms. The same segment of the population working as producers and consumers here creates quite contrasting images, although analysis reveals them as emanating from a consistent set of interests. This separation allows for further twists in the nature of representation, since the failure of the modernist council estate could be (and was) manipulated by the media to appear as evidence for the failure of the ideals of communality such estates appeared to represent. It was indeed a failure of such imagery, but it must be remembered that the very image of society, and in some cases of socialism, the council estate embodied was that imposed by academics and professionals, and never that of the residents, who have neither a place in the construction of that image, nor the means for its appropriation.

This analysis of the dominant building styles of our society suggests that a set of representations derived from the interests and perspectives of a particular group in society not only denies access to this aspect of culture to alternative perspectives, but at the same time causes these representations to appear to be the image of those who have been excluded. There are comparable cases in other areas of culture studies (e.g. Williams 1961), where what appears to us as the image of one section of society is actually fabricated by a quite different class. In such cases, the object, in this case building form, may act as a kind of material ideology', but the meaning of this term is open to considerable dispute.

The root of the modern use of the term ideology lies with Marx. The theory of value which was the cornerstone of Capital asserts clearly that the very terms and their accepted connotations used in conventional descriptions of the political economy of the time, mystified and suppressed the true nature of, for example, exchange value, as an outcome of the dominance of capitalist interests. Marxism invented itself as the proper understanding of the nature of history seen from the perspective of labour, and should therefore have become the perspective and consciousness of labour. In the later history of Marxism, the re-education of the peasantry and workers, along with the transformation of production processes, has always been a prime instrument in the securing of revolutionary goals (Hinton 1972). This practice is saved from its apparent idealist overtones by its claimed congruence with inevitable historical transformations whose roots lie elsewhere.

This argument was refined by Lukács' (1971) suggestion that only certain historical transformations could bring the proletariat to realize their true interests and thereby allow them to commence revolutionary action. In view of this, Marxist teaching can be seen as a kind of catalyst. Not surprisingly, this doctrine has become especially important to those who feel as a matter of Marxist science that the proletariat ought by now to have enacted a revolutionary response to the crises which are seen as always present; and their failure to do so is therefore commonly explained as an aspect of false consciousness, which prevented them from recognizing their proper historical duty.

Recent criticisms have been made of several aspects of this approach. Historical analysis suggests that the argument that the perspectives of dominant groups are so pervasive as to permit no alternative or popular forms of representation is untenable Abercrombie, Hill and Turner 180). Marxists influenced by Gramsci's analysis have also often asserted the impact of dominant ideas, but, in their view, acquiescence has been always problematic; it has to be worked for through the establishment of hegemony and can never be simply taken for granted. Furthermore, it is commonly met by diverse forms of resistance (e.g. Hall et al. 1976).

One approach to this problem may be derived from the theory of objectification according to which access to culture, as the externalization through which the social group is constructed, is the basis for social development. In so far as society is divided into different interests, of which labour and capital are the prototypical examples, it may well be that some interests have more control than others over the development of representations which accord to their perspective and thus their interests. As Foucault has shown (1981: 92102), the power they hold is productive, not merely suppressive, of culture. The concept of perspective implies that understanding is derived from a particular position in the world. If two groups have different perspectives, then, in so far as they are able to create the world, they naturally attempt to do so in accordance with their own perspective, or 'habitus'. In as much, however, as the cultural forms thereby produced become the external environment through which emerge other groups whose interests are not identical, and indeed may be contrary, to their own, we are faced with the situation described in the discussion of building styles above, where the dominated group is forced to attempt to invest itself in the domain of culture represented by the built environment in terms of a set of objects whose initial meanings are antagonistic to its own interests.

What this suggests is that despite valid criticism of their pretensions as theoretical perspectives, the notion of both a dominant ideology and a false consciousness do have at least some place in a theory of ideology. One group may dominate large areas of cultural production, while another, through lack of access to cultural form, may be less clear as to the nature of its own interests. The problems arise when these are reified as essential attributes of an entire spectrum of cultural form. The class which is defined in relation to buildings, essentially that of private as against public tenure, is not the same as that defined by another division such as profession. Although dominant as far as building styles and the press are concerned, this same social segment may be less influential in the areas of trade unions and popular culture. Following this expressivist logic, if a group is unable to objectify its interests in certain domains it may attempt to create its own cultural forms in some other field, although some groups without any resources are bereft of both power and prospects in virtually all spheres. One of the results of the quantitative increase in material culture, providing new domains of representation all working in particular ways, is to complicate further the problem of what may be termed material ideology.

## The Limits of Objectivism

This complexity is ignored by many of the approaches to ideology which have in common a tendency towards what may be termed 'objectivism', a term which emphasizes a general antipathy towards a subject- or agency-centered perspective. Where the question of ideology is paramount, the concern is with the manner in which control over cultural forms is used to suppress contradictions or conflicts (Larrain 1982: 15). In recent years, however, analysis based upon a given concept of ideology has been complemented by other projects, some of which also analyse buildings as repressive mechanisms or authoritarian representations (e.g. Foucault 1977b), but whose overarching concepts such as 'power' or 'discourse' imply a still greater distance between interests and representations, and thereby a greater commitment to objectivism.

Critical objectivist approaches have tended towards a totalizing perspective, by virtue of their style of analysis which tries to rise above culture. When applied to the world of goods, such approaches therefore tend to subsume the whole spectrum of industrial commodities under a variety of notions of cultural dominance. In most cases, this is simply inferred in a phrase about the evils of commodity consumption. There has been, however, a range of attempts to emphasize the place of commodities in exemplifying some general condition of dominance, which goes beyond the more particular implications of ideology. Examples of such studies might include aspects of Marcuse's One Dimensional Man (1964), the earlier work of Lukács (1971), Barthes's Mythologies (1973), Lasch's The Culture Narcissism (1979), and studies by Ewen and Ewen (1982) and Haug (1986). Although these works commonly refer to the bourgeois world as a specific interest group within society, the actual material analysed, such as blue jeans, soap operas or boxing, often represents the cultural forms adopted by the whole spectrum of society.

As an illustration of what appears to be the inevitable result of a strongly objectivist analysis which presupposes its equal relevance for all commodity forms, there follows a bri summary the trajectoy taken by one of the more sustained attempts to focus on the commodity as the central object of research, by the French social theorist Baudrillard. Baudrillard began his studies in the earlier tradition of symbolic analysis, with an attempt to examine the significatory properties of modern mass consumption (e.g. 1981: 2987). From the beginning, however, he was concerned to overturn one of the most important of the assumed signifieds, that is utility as defined on the right and use value as defined on the left (1975, 1981: 130-63). His critique of Marx's concept of use value helped to open the way for anthropological studies of the cultural construction of need (e.g. Sahlins 1976a), and suggested that the ideas of 'true' and false' needs sometimes used in critical studies (e.g. Marcuse 1964) were severely problematic. In time, however, these ideas developed into a much more general critique, in which objects not only did not signify use value but were found not to signify anything outside of themselves. In the modern world, they were held to have become so totally interchangeable that there was no value which could not be reduced to this cycle of exchange. In contrast to Bourdieu, Baudrillard el the differences between objects. Rather than representing, the sign becomes the front behind which the actual disappearance of the signified goes unnoticed, and we are left merely with the medium itself.

The resulting argument is typical of that current in post-structurai Stuc   that   hi w ceain history which we use to communicate/signify/represent/constitute, but actually today there is simply a world of objects in terms of which our notions of self and society are created. In short, our identity has become synonymous with patterns of consumption which are determined elsewhere. Taken to its logical conclusion (and the advantage of Baudrillard is that he does just this), this view entails a denial of all signification. Baudrillard's argument becomes highly convoluted, as in his The Precession of Simulacra (1983), which postulates the annihilation of all content, but the outcome of this contention is clearly nihilistic, since any opposition to this trend, or any radicalism, would be simply subsumed by this subversion of the sign. Che Guevara, Marx and Baudrillard himself himself are therefore destined to become merely a set of surfaces to play with as commodities which have lost the possibility of any further depth. In the case of Baudrillard, this appears to have been a self-fulfilling prophecy, and he is mainly quoted today within the avant-garde arts, where he is indeed very much in vogue (Frankovits ed. 1984).

Baudrillard's biography provides a clear example of the limits of extreme objectivism as an approach to mass commodities (compare Anderson 1983: 32-55 on post-structuralism in general). In a less sustained form, this is still a much used line of attack. Indeed, some of the ideas developed by Baudrillard in the early 1970s recently resurfaced in a critique of the culture of late capitalism by Jameson (1984; see also Foster ed. 1983). Jameson puts forward the familar argument that society has lost any possibility of depth or effect, and is reduced to mere pastiche and superficial self-comment. We are left with a play on signs which has no ultimate reference point other than the commodity. The cultural forms of late capitalism have thus become entirely pervasive and able to subsume any attempt at opposition.

The context for this argument is a critique of post-modernism. This term usually refers either specifically to a movement in architecture which emphasizes a return to a popular façade based upon the design of mass commodities (e.g. Jencks 1977; Venturi, Scott Brown and Izenours 1972), or else to the more general movement towards pluralism and primitivism which followed the critique of modernism. In Jameson's critique, it is precisely this populism and celebration of kitsch which is denigrated. This results in a quite misguided emphasis. Jameson seems to object to the fall of modernism and the decline of a critical aesthetic, and fails to learn from the quite genuine failure of modernism itself with regard to its popular acceptability. What he thereby misses is that post-modernism represents simply a new façade or twist to architectural style as ideology discussed earlier. It serves to hide the professional, that is elite, structure through which it continues to operate by assuming the mantal of the popular for itself. It purports to be an appropriation of the public building by the people, when it is actually an appropriation of a particular version of the populist by one dominant group.

Jameson's approach is typical of that conservatism which regards all other periods of history as authentic, but the present as the final inauthentic state. It is a Romantic version of modernism which is viewed as genuinely progressive and critical, rather than merely the means by which capitalism destroyed any tradition which might have opposed its hegemony. A similar point is made by Anderson (1984) with respect to a still more eloquent defence of modernism by Berman (1983). Modernism certainly had its place in the destruction of the ancien régime, but it is only one particular form of social change and has recently been most conspicuous in its failures. Furthermore, modernism created a considerable degree of misery and frustration by insisting that only one particular dominant style had the right to be considered the appropriate form for the expression of socialism.

In relation to the object world, all analyses based on strong objectivism tend to produce similar results. They act to reproduce what has been called the mass culture critique (which may come equally from the political right or left, see Hebdige 1981a), in which the objects of mass consumption today are treated as so tainted, superficial and trite that they could not possibly be worth investigating. There may also be the tacit and covert implication that those people who have to live in and through such an object world are equally superficial and deluded, and are unable to comprehend their position. This implies a rejection of any activities undertaken by the mass of the population (always with the exception of direct revolutinary actin) as a possible bass or learnig about the uture development of our society. The argument is that people cannot construct socialism out of kitsch (sometimes with the equally problematic implication that they can out of art). In the terms of Bourdieu's Distinction, these often esoteric academic critiques tend to align closely with the avant-garde arts as holders of cultural capital.

There are many varied precursors to this modern branch of the mass culture critique, for example, the work of Morris, Adorno and Marcuse (e.g. Horkheimer and Adorno 1979), as well as several early versions of the notion of false consciousness. A typical contemporary assumption is spelled out by Gortz, who claims that 'working-class demands have turned into consumerist mass demands. An atomised serialised mass of proletarians demand to be given by society, or more precisely the state, what they are unable to take or produce' (1982: 240). Such a position does not lend itself to anthropological analysis, since one of the objectives of the discipline is to learn something of value from the practices of the people one is studying. The argument that there is a thing called capitalist society which renders its population entirely pathological and dehumanized, with the exception of certain theorists who, although inevitably living their private lives in accordance with the tenets of this delusion, are able in their abstracted social theory to rise above, criticize and provide the only alternative model for society, is somewhat suspicious. The clear lesson of the history of modernism is that the academic left is quite capable of fashioning a central instrument for the reproduction of the interests of the dominant class at precisely the moment when it is making the most strident claims to the contrary.

## Recontextualization

It was suggested earlier that the potential for a balance between objectivism and subjectivism in social theory has been demonstrated by a number of recent models (e.g. Bourdieu 1977; Giddens 1979). The problem is then how to translate this balance from the more general issues of social theory to the particular context of mass consumption, and certain limitations in the book Distinction with regard to just such a translation have been noted. The extreme objectivism which was rejected above is expressed through a variety of images of an overarching class interest or subsuming discourse, usually related either directly to production or to the general term capitalism, which is used to eliminate the possibility of dominated groups as arbiters of cultural form. Clearly, some fields of material culture, such as that of building style, are compatible with such an approach. If other examples can be located which appear to suggest an alternative conclusion, then this raises the more general question as to what appears to determine the suitability of different theoretical emphases to various material forms.

There is a clear tendency for the more anthropological accounts of consumption, such as those of Bourdieu and Douglas, to concentrate on consumer interests. Another anthropological study based on an analysis of a particular domain of objects is by James (1979), who analyses the sweets which are purchased by children themselves, as opposed to those bought for them by adults. The suggestion is that these 'kets', as they are called in north-east England, although they are found throughout the country, are generated as an inverse transformation of the acceptable qualities of adult foods. They are, in symbolic terms, systematically 'inedible', for example through the use of strong artificial colours avoided in adult food, the portrayal of 'inedible' animals such as beetles and snakes, 'inedible' objects such as machine tools, bootlaces or flying saucers, and subjects disapproved of by adults, particularly ghoulish representations of corpses, blood, vampires and death. Indeed, since the article was written there has been a considerable increase in the number of skulls and corpses in white chocolate which ooze red when bitten into, and a set of candy bones which form skeletons and are purchased in small plastic coffins for ten pence.

The implications of this example are quite different from those of building forms. Here, a social group which is in a relationship of inferiority to the dominant adult world is able to objectify a perspective which asserts clearly the potential opposition of its interests to that world. This suggests a degree of autonomy in cultural production on behalf of dominated groups. While the sweets are produced by industrial processes for mass consumption, and according solely to the demands of profit, it would be equally hard to argue that the result is the responsibility of either some evil genius at the production end, or some demonic child at the consumption end. Rather, we have the emergence, over a considerable period of time, of a children's culture. This in not simply the product of a dominant ideology or control over cultural representation, nor a pure act of resistance, but the mutually constituted relationship of two sets of interests and self-images. This example, then, although opposed to the objetivism of the mass culture critique, could not be termed subjectivist in orientation.

Assessed in terms of mass consumption, a balance between subjectivism and objectivism can be seen as a balance between the wegh  the  ain or ouctin - tion. The relationship between these two forces must be seen as constantly interactive, not largely autonomous as implied by Bourdi. Despite the enormous efforts made through advertising, design and the media to create markets for given products, well documented by writers such as Galbraith (1969) and Haug (1986), profits are always dependent upon the reciprocal ability of marketing staff to interpret the changes in the way in which goods are used in social relations. Advertising for items such as children's sweets may confirm and help expand the process of objectification of the child's image of the world, but it could hardly be said to have initiated it. If it is the case, as suggested by various studies (Leiss, Kline and Jhally 1986: 33), that a , st term purchasing trends, then this is an extraordinary finding of contemporary research. While there are other grounds for criticizing the advertising profession, and evidence for a cumulative effect upon social expectations and concepts of lifestyle in general, the failure of any simple correspondence theory should alert us to the complexity of this articulation between production and consumption.

An article by Hebdige (1981b, see also 1983) examining the changing meaning of the motor scooter provides an unusally clear picture of the dynamic interaction between the two forces of production and consumption. The development of the object as image is followed through three 'moments': those of design, distribution and consumption. The argument, in very condensed form, is that the motor scooter was developed in Italy as the feminine equivalent of the more macho motorbike. These gender terms stand for a wide range of associated connotations of industrialization and commodification, through which the childlike scooter, with its enclosed machine parts, reproduces in its relationship to the motorbike the basic asymmetry in the status of the sexes. These images are, however, transformed in a manner not intended by the producers (though later picked up and encouraged by them), but which is established rather through articulation with emergent polarities in British youth cultures. The motorbike takes on an association with the rockers which is then contrasted to the motor scooter's place in the construction of the mods' sense of style; the latter representing a more continental 'soft' image against the rocker's American 'hard' image. The new grouping is consistent with, but not determined by, the original image created by the industry. Obviously, such a brief account omits all the subtlety of the original, which is considerable.

Hebdige's article provides a bridge between those analyses termed 'anthropological', which appear to ignore the direct interests of producers, and those, mainly marxist or commercial, which assume an entirely passive reaction by consumers. It demonstrates both industry's careful reading of the market to try and differentiate material forms on the basis of a prior social division, in this case gender, and also the fact that the transformation of these objects in

Britain provided the foundation for the formation of new social groups, to whom consumer style was so integral that they could not be considered prior to those material changes through which they expressed and thereby created themselves (see also Willis 1978: 11-61). Hebdige's article also permits the reintroduction of elements of intention, and what Giddens (1979: 5) terms discursive penetration', to both producer and consumer, while retaining a sense of the larger historical forces emanating from social and technological change.

The three examples so far discussed appear to lend themselves to different theoretical perspectives and conclusions, yet they are all drawn from contemporary British consumption patterns. One factor which might be responsible for the differences between them is the properties of the objects themselves as material culture. It is no coincidence that the three sets of objects can be arranged according to a scale of size decreasing from buildings, through motor scooters to sweets. Buildings are enormous artefacts, immovable, extremely expensive, highly visible and highly durable. Their material importance has led to the extensive involvement of the state in their production and allocation, and their status as major purchases affords opportunities for conspicuous consumption. Such artefacts may tend towards the representation of dominant perspectives, made most explicit in the concept of monuments.

By contrast, there is the vast array of what may be termed 'portable industrial artefacts': the contents of the high streets, supermarkets and shopping catalogues, objects ranging from saucepans, to skirts, to three piece suites. Compared to buildings, they are cheaper, less durable and therefore more amenable to short-term fashion. They may be less likely to attract the interest of the state or the overall image of industrial production, though many are affected by parallel contrasting images of modernity and tradition. They are, however, the subject of mass marketing and advertising, and the source of much immediate profit. Their very variety suggests that a dynamic interplay between the worlds of business and consumption results in a plethora of relationships and divisions.

Within this area are many objects which are so small, cheap and transient that comparatively little research and investment is likely to be put into the active promotion of new forms determined by production, and the producer may be reduced to a more or less passive respondent to apparent shifts in demand. Obviously, no simple correlation will be found between size of object as a single factor and the nature of the object as representation; but when size is taken as a general gloss for a number of those factors relating to framing, consciousness and triviality discussed in chapter 6, it is clear that the nature of material culture itself may be a much underestimated factor in accounting for the patterns and relationships of modern style. The key dimension may not be whether the object is received through the market or some alternative distributive mechanism, but rather its place as a consumption item in constructing social images.

The complexity of the articulation between producer and consumer interests is further illustrated by the case of advertising in women's magazines. In recent years, criticism has been made of the tendency in such magazines to occlude the distinction between text and advert, on the grounds that this is a form of distortion which betrays the trust of the reader  hdependent jectiviy itorial content . Earnshaw 1984). Clearly, many magazines contain articles merely as a front for the dissemination of the advertisements from which the vast bulk of their income is derived, and in so far as they have editorial comment this reflects those messages (Curren 1986; Ferguson 1983). Thus we find advertising features such as articles on holiday resorts and wines in which it is impossible to separate objective opinion from advertising pitch. Does it follow, however, that the readers 'put up' with the bulk of advertising merely because of their interest in the incidental articles?

So evident is the high proportion of adverts in such magazines that the critic who believes that readers are simply fooled by the lack of clear demarcation, must credit them with a remarkably low level of perception. The alternative possibility is that both editors and readers are actually far more interested in the adverts than the rest of the magazine content, and collude in the use of this additional material largely as a legitimation for this practice. The implication that, despite the vast presence of advertising, many people actually want still more of the stuff, is not all that surprising, given the previous arguments for the importance of material goods in modern social relations. After all, having possibly spent a great deal of time in unpleasant and unremitting labour, the wage earner may be forgiven for considering the translation of these wages into an act of consumption as being of some importance; obtaining the right object may considerably enhance a reputation or signify membership of a social group, while making the wrong purchase may lead to exclusion and frustration.

This argument is not intended as a defence of the extent of modern advertising, whose interests are clearly derived from company profitability rather than the enhancement of the welfare of the purchaser. It does, however, demonstrate that there is an activity centered on relating goods to larger concerns about the nature of self and society, which may emerge particularly clearly in advertising. Goffman (1979) has demonstrated how central aspects of social inequalities and concepts of self-presentation may be identified through advertisement analysis. The critic who points out that the advertisement appears to have noting to do with the material and functional nature of the product is merely reproducing the general illusion of vulgar functionalism enshrined in modernism. It is the secondary, often social, but possibly also humorous, moral or sexual connotations which represent the actual value of the 'aestheticized commodity' (Haug 1986: 72) to the purchaser.

Modern feature writing has started to become far more explicit in this collusion. Certain new magazines (and not only free ones) are now distributed explictly as consumer guides. These magazines have been joined by the colour supplements with long explicit consumer features, and series where potential peers are presented in their own rooms with the full cultural regalia of furnishings, decorations, cars and so forth. Winship's (1983) analysis of Options, a recently launched women's magazine, suggests that this close liaison with the modern commodity world plays upon the fantastic in terms of goals which are largely unrealizable in a material sense, but which are clearly lived as fantasy. Fantastic does not, however, mean vicarious, nor does the construction of myth imply mere illusion. The projection of images of possible worlds and cosmologies has always been central to the development of social relations. Neither should this collusion between consumer and producer be seen as always implying an individualistic competitive consumer practice. Adverts may be used as much to help an individual accord with a set of communal values and feelings of social responsibility, as in the explicit advertising of socialism.

The case of advertising complicates another common assumption in critical writing on modern culture, which is that the evaluation of consumption patterns is to be assessed entirely on the basis of hierarchy and the strategies of inclusion or exclusion. Bourdieu is a clear case in point. As a contemporary example, there has been an impressive recent rise of a series of commonly linked 'healthy' practices. These include the wider cultivation and use of wholefoods, organic and pesticide-free crops, homeopathy, acupuncture, biorhythms and other alternative medicines, jogging, areobics and new l for example, manyof thee consumers tnd to be t wing, scially generally expensive alternatives to both the upermarket n the national health service.

If this set of practices is to be condemned as a new form of middle-class oppression through differentiation, then by the same logic many forms of mass culture which have no connection with any 'traditional' working-class regime, but are essentially the results of mechanization and mass production, may become identified with a positive image in the writings of critical sociologists. This tendency emerges in the important body of research entitled popular culture studies (e.g. Bigsby ed. 1976; Waites et al. eds 1982), which has developed in Britain as a major instrument of left-wing cultural politics. The perspective taken in most of these studies is closely related to that represented here, in so far as many of them, including the work of Hebdige, are specifically designed to rescue the possibilities of mass materials from the derogatory attitude of the mass culture critique. The subject of such analysis is usually cultural pursuits such as leisure activities and the mass media, rather than material objects per se, and mass activities such as shopping have received relatively little critical attention (Mort 1986, though see Williamson 1986a on consumption). Popular culture, however, tends to be ambiguous with respect to actual mass culture. It often attempts to deal specifically with working-class culture or with sub-cultures which are seen as resistant to the dominant forces in society, so that, as with Bourdieu, though in a somewhat different way, the analysis tens toreduce the material to  place in reproducing osing given social positions and conflicts.

The association of the cultural practices of dominated groups with a heroic image is clearly problematic, with writings increasingly assuming that popular means positive (Williamson 1986b). Modern critical texts often contain contradictory evaluative stances. Should, for example, the hard, macho image of some youth groups be positively evaluated as working-class, but negatively evaluated when examined from the perspectives of feminism and racism? Strongly influenced by the pioneering work of Stuart Hall, both the Centre for Contemporary Studies in Birmingham and, more recently, the Open University have produced an extensive literature on these subjects, in which such contradictions are explicitly addressed.

The problem with reducing the analysis of specific material domains to their place in social differentiation and the reproduction of dominance is not only distributive, in that these may crosscut the given social divisions, but also interpretive, in that this approach may tend to ignore all the other projects in the development of which goods are employed. This is argued by Douglas and Isherwood (1979), who stress cognitive demands in the stabilization of categories through their material expression. Objects have always formed an important part of religious and other similar expressive activities. Asceticism, despite its prominence as an ideal, has played a relatively restricted role in most of the world religions, the actual experience of the mass populace having been oriented more towards certain buildings or monuments and the performing of defined, and often elaborate, ritual activities, so that the opposition commonly assumed between materialism and spirituality is based more on an ideal than on a practised dichotomy.

The wider projects encompassed in material appurtenances may be exemplified through an examination of two studies of fashion. Simmel's analysis (1957: 308-15) focuses upon the relationship between individual and social expression not only as posing problems for social theorists, but also as a lived contradiction for the subjects of such theorists. Simmel argues that fashion plays a major part in many people's attempt to live out the contradictory pulls of this perceived duality. Typically, Simmel does not present these as alternatives, a trend towards isolation as opposed to a trend towards integration, but as necessarily contradictory elements of the same actions. Fashion demands an individual conception of a conventional style, thereby allowing the preservation of a private world, a self-conception which is saved from exposure by the expediency of convention. In obeying the dictates of style, it is the social being which takes responsibility for choice, yet there is simultaneously an arena for personal strategy. Fashion then provides a surface which is partly expressive, but which also in part protects individuals from having to expose their taste in public. This study provides a clear exemplification of the concept of consumption activity as a means of living through necesary contradictions.

In a recent more general study, Wilson (1985: 22847) argues strongly for the viability of the project of creative recontextualization of these products of mass production, against the particular form of the mass culture critique espoused by some feminist perspectives. The approaches discussed above, which tend towards extreme ojecivism, are associated by Wilson with a search for authenticity as some natural 'true' female image outside of the context of consumption and patriarchy, leading in practice to a puritanical moralism. Against this, Wilson posits fashion as a mode of modernity providing a more fluid and flexible form of feminist expression which may promote active criticism of the forces it wishes to oppose, but is also creatively self-defining for feminism, employing modes such as fantasy, parody, and humour in this project. The reason why Wilson's modernism, unlike either classic architectural modernism or the claimed populism of post-modernism, is acceptable as positive recontextualization, lies in the difference between the practitioners. Within architecture and art, the image of both abstract science and high-street commercial 'pop' is always imposed by professionals, who are in effect interpreting the image of another class. With fashion, on the other hand, there is the possibility of mass participatory modernism, in which images provide groups with a vehicle for appropriating and utilizing cultural forces themselves. Fantasy here may or may not be a mystifying force preventing the housewife from attaining an objective understanding of the forms of her oppression, but like religion before it, it is a world either of idealized morals and possibilities, or else of outrageous alternatives against which everyday life may be both evaluated and understood, and, as such, it has attractions of its own for the consumer.

## Conclusion: The Birth of the Consumer

All the examples given above have been used to complicate the problem of analysing the meaning of specific domains. In some cases, the nature of the objects themselves is firmly implicated, as in children's sweets; while in other cases, such as that of motor scooters, the form of the objects stays the same and it is their connotations which radically alter. What underlies this complexity is less an appeal for pluralism than a recognition of a pluralism which already confronts us. All the objects discussed are the direct product of commercial concerns and industrial processes. Taken together, they appear to imply that in certain circumstances segments of the population are able to appropriate such industrial objects and utilize them in the creation of their own image. In other cases, people are forced to live in and through objects which are created though the images held of them by a different and dominant section of the population. The possibilities of recontextualization may vary for any given object according to its historical context, or for one particular individual according to his or her changing social environment. Hebdige's work indicates that motor scooters were transformed according to the conceptions of youth groups, but the original distinction promoted in the initial design and marketing of these goods was that of gender. There is nothing in the later trajectory of the images of these goods which suggests that the ability of the bikes and scooters to reproduce gender asymmetry was in any way deflected by the transformation represented by these later shifts.

Simultaneous with the insistence that recontextualization may be possible has been an avoidance of the other extreme, which is that all such recontextualization is a form of resistance which should be regarded as inevitably positive in its consequence. The term recontextualization implies the concept of text which is itself open to many readings, and several parallels may be drawn with discussions concerning the death of the author (here perhaps the death of the producer), in the sociology of art (Wolff 1981: 117-37). Just as modern sociological theory has suggested that the meaning of the text is not simply reducible to the intentions. perspectives or interests of the author, so also the emergence of the object from the world of capitalist or state production does not make it of necessity a direct representation of the interests of capital or the state.

The concept of the death of the author in sociology has, however, rarely led to what might be called the 'birth of the reader'. Most of the writers who have used such ideas (e.g. Barthes 1977: 142-8; Foucault 1977a: 113-38) have tended to work within that form of poststructuralism and strong objectivism in which the attack on the author is part of a more general critique of the subject, such that the rejection of the highly individualistic autonomous subject of the liberal tradition develops into a denial of any degree of autonomy or individuality in social relations. The problem with the objectivist foundations for this approach is that the critique of capitalism too often becomes a critique of mass industrial culture per se, which has had the effct of stifling any positive advocacy of a potential popular alternative which remains within the context of industrial culture. To that extent, the academic advocates of socialism may be partly responsible for rendering it increasingly unattractive to those sections of society for whom a direct increase in material wealth remains a primary concern.

In contrast to this nihilistic conclusion, the material presented here suggests that the notion of recontextualization permits a more positive reading of the possibilities for the receptor of the commodity. The change from user to consumer is not necessarily the kind of fall from freedom suggested by Raymond Williams (1980), but may lie closer to possibilities which are addressed in other trends within the sociology of art, where interpretation is understood as recreation (Wolff 1981: 95-116). In the study of mass consumption, this becomes translated from abstract theory into a continual interaction mediated by the specific form of industrial commerce through which the material manifestation of this relationship is continually being recreated. Any approach to mass consumption must therefore deal directly with this same mass of objects.

The complexity and contradictions which have been illustrated in contemporary material culture may be accounted for in terms of the general characteristics of this media noted in chapter 6. Objects as diverse concrete forms may be used to create simultaneous but highly diverse representations whose very materiality acts to prevent them coming into direct conflict at the level of open and conscious dispute. Material forms therefore lend themselves admirably to the workings of both ideological control and uncontested dissent. This reconfirms the problematic nature of the relationship between culture and society noted in the first part of this book. Rather than postulating some relatively consistent phenomenon called 'society' that is distorted or misrepresented by culture, we may dispense with any such assumptions concerning prior subjects, and deal directly with the actual contradictory and complex phenomena of cultural form within which and through which social relations operate. If this argument is not to regress into the objectivist attack on society and the subject, however, it can only be by reaffirming the essentially positive nature of culture as objectification and the possibilities it provides for social development, which will be the aim of the next chapter.
