> 来源：Design Anthropology Object Cultures in Transition (Alison J. Clarke (editor))
> 原始文件：C:\Users\lenovo\Documents\Codex\2026-05-29\书籍专著\Design Anthropology Object Cultures in Transition (Alison J. Clarke (editor))\Design Anthropology Object Cultures in Transition (Alison J. Clarke (editor)).md
> 识别方式：强章节标记

## Part V: The Value in Being Explicit about Values

Finally, we need to come all the way back around to where we started: the connection between the work we do and the ‘places’ where we have come to do it—the worlds of design, engineering, product development, brand, and business strategy. The purpose of these disciplines and divisions is to create new ‘things’ (a term we use broadly to include material as well as non-material entities such as ‘identities’), and the initial impulse to find research that could provide a more instructive basis for making those things comes from those disciplines. So the research work has always had, in this venue, an instrumental end, no matter how idealistically any individual researcher may have framed the larger intent (us included; see Robinson’s Capitalist Tool apologia during the height of the boom, 2001) of understanding behavior, experience, work. This history is crucial: for, as the field expands, interested researchers continue to arrive, unaware of this fundamental responsibility to getting something new made, to making some sort of change take place, and begin to work as if it is enough to do research. The point is that this was never enough.

That is not a bad thing. One way of understanding the work that we do, in all its variations, is that we look at a present set of ‘what is’ conditions and develop a knowledge-supported imagination of what “could be.” The truth of good design work has always been somewhere between complete invention and acknowledgment of inevitability. Probably the wrestling with inevitability, and getting around it, is the impulse that most directly connects design and research. It seems to us that the early phase of the rise of human-centered design, design research, and ethnography in applied settings gave us a more nuanced, more complex understanding of the ‘now.’ It established in industries the idea of understanding the individual, social, and cultural influences on why people think the way they do, why they use what they use, and why they need what they (think they) need as important bases for good design.

Less obviously, the hand-in-glove work between the two fields makes researchers complicit in a conscious attempt to shape the future, not just in understanding the present. Design, by definition, involves an alternative, always somewhat subversive (Marcuse 1978) plan for the future. When research is twinned to that effort, when—to stretch the application of Jean Piaget’s famous title—understanding is invention, the research that informs the design bears a significant part of the responsibility for those options and those limitations. If the work we do makes a particular alternate future more likely, that means directly affecting other folks’ choices. We have made a choice about what others ‘ought’ to do, which is exactly what we sign up for when we undertake to do ethnographic research in applied settings. So, we have a responsibility to articulate why we are making those choices. How and what we have weighed in providing that framing advice to our development colleagues.

We use the term ‘good design’ almost reflexively as evaluation and often as explanation. When something is tabbed as ‘good design’ (by a magazine or an award from a professional association), we agree or not in the instance, but we accept, usually tacitly, that good design is different from indifferent design or bad design. Despite that, we do not usually think of ‘good’ in its moral or ethical sense, as in ‘good versus evil’ (unless we are from Google). Positive, thoughtful, or responsible design has included in it not just a final function or form, but a large number of distinctions understood and choices about those distinctions made in a particular light, with particular reasons for them. A child’s toy, perhaps, can be safe or unsafe, educational or mindless, responsibly made or using the worst but cheapest materials available. It is not a toy made to be bad, but in each of the moments where choice matters, the choice made has been, in the current context at least, toward something less than as good as it could have been.

So the values that shape the making of things are not simply those of the individuals involved in the project(s). Corporations like to act as if these choices are not personal, which makes it easy to ignore the idea that values are being expressed throughout a seemingly ‘rational’ process. That does not mean that the issue of responsibility goes away. But where and how do we get values back into the work, especially if that might just mean conflict with the disposition of value in a business process (such as innovation, product development, communications, or business strategies)?

Just as a practice is an important locus for the externalization and evolution of expertise, it is also, we think, at the right scale and locus to ask, forcefully, “to what end are we doing this work?” with an emphasis on the “we.” There are, of course, broad issues such as privacy standards where the articulation of values needs to take place across the practical manifestations of the many institutions (corporate and academic) that inform applied work. But clearly articulated values also provide the basis that a particular practice at a particular intersection of knowledge, individuals, intentions, and possibilities can use to orient locally, to nurture identity, and to push back against the limited and often narrowly construed sets of goals that a larger enterprise ‘wants’ in any given year. Of course, the answer to the question “to what end are we doing this work” changes as a function of the audience and the location of the audience—management versus development, for example. This has deep implications for the kinds of stories that we tell and how values must necessarily shift to address specific individuals who are responsible for different kinds of decisions.

We are not arguing here for any particular set of values, only for the conscious and explicit articulation of them in, by, and for working practices; an explicit awareness of what we are doing, with whom, and for what end. We believe that this notion is supported by a distinct push toward explicit values and away from a sort of corporate agnosticism afoot in some of the most interesting work in areas such as corporate social responsibility and environmental and social activism. The World Wildlife Foundation’s Tom Compton, in a 2008 report entitled Weathercocks and Signposts, eloquently critiqued the predominant “marketing approach” to “motivating environmentally-friendly behaviour change” by arguing that “any adequate strategy for tackling environmental challenges will demand engagement with the values that underlie the decisions we make.” Compton makes a nice distinction between the figure of “weathercocks” (“weathervanes” to American English speakers), or indicators of where or how things are going in the present (e.g., percentage of households recycling), with the figure of the “signpost,” which tells us where to go, and often, how far it is or how difficult it is going to be to get there. Giving us guidance on getting somewhere is more important, and more difficult, than telling us how we are doing now. In the basic notion of design as the work of planning, how to get to ‘next’ from ‘here,’ we believe that values, as much as ‘additional value’ or ‘experience,’ should be the forward anchor of that arc.

The conceptual figure of ‘signposts’ is something that may have the potential to become part of how any research practice materializes its work, much in the way that ‘frameworks,’ ‘experience models,’ or ‘customer journeys’ have become boundary objects for ethnography and design. Creating signposts entails more active constructs than the more generally descriptive idiom of EPIC-type work usually affords a research practice. What makes a particular direction or evolution for any new ‘thing’ better than another is not an inquiry that can be bracketed out of a primary research question. Most applied ethnographic work brackets questions of form, engineering, marketing, and distribution in the pursuit of interesting models of how things work now. But when we take what ‘ought’ to happen into account, where a product or a techno-human ‘ecology’ should go, and the role the inquirers have in marking that way, become primary research objects themselves.

And in this is the connection between our two bits of proselytizing. The importance of rethinking the work as the creation of both a body of knowledge and an engagement with what that body of knowledge might be used for. Not to claim that all outcomes are foreseeable, but that they cannot be managed unless you are clear as to what the practice is after. This clarity needs to live at the heart of our commitments inside the organizations in which we work.

Immigrants’ tales often hinge on the connections and differences between generations, and on the ways in which values are maintained or how they change. What it means to fully inhabit a new country is in the new ways of realizing the original ‘things could be different’ impulse. The first decade or so of concentrated work has made a next generation of work possible. But techniques and methodologies are not the best measure of change, nor the standard of innovation; they are a means to measure our ability to sustain ourselves in the present context, a component of necessary expertise. If we bound the field (or a practice bounds itself ) by how it does its work rather than by what it is trying to accomplish, we have missed the point, and the opportunity.

In social as well as business contexts, values have always driven change. Deep humanism underlies both the work of social and human scientists as well as our colleagues in design and development disciplines. But we cannot assume their nature or their applicability. Values, like all human frameworks, are tractable things, and they are changed by the things we make and by the way we make things. Researchers and designers can, by making articulation and externalization an everyday part of their practice, keep the goal of making things better a realistic ideal.

## References

Bezaitis, M. (2009), “Practice, Products, and the Future of Ethnographic Work,” in M. Cotton and S. Pulman-Jones (eds.), EPIC 2009: Taking Care of Business. Proceedings of the EPIC 2009, 92–107, Washington, DC: American Anthropological Society.

Cain, J. T. (1998), “Experience-Based Design: Toward a Science of Artful Business Innovation,” Design Management Journal, Fall: 10–4.

Compton, T. (2008), “Weathercocks and Signposts: The Environment Movement at a Crossroads.” World Wildlife Federation UK. Available online: www.wwf.org.uk/filelibrary/pdf/weathercocks\_report2.pdf (accessed February 2, 2016).

Csikszentmihalyi, M., W. Damon and H. Gardner (2001), Good Work: Where Excellence and Ethics Meet, New York: Basic Books.

Geertz, C. (1973), “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight,” in C. Geertz (ed.), The Interpretation of Cultures, 412–53, New York: Basic Books.

Lynch, K. (1970), The Image of the City, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Marcuse, H. (1978), The Aesthetic Dimension: Toward a Critique of Marxist Aesthetics, Urbana & Chicago: Beacon Press.

Robinson, R. E. (1993), “What to Do with a Human Factor: A Manifesto of Sorts,” American Center for Design Journal: New Human Factors, 7 (1): 63–73.

Robinson, R. E. (1994a), “The Origin of Cool Things,” in Design That Packs a Wallop: Understanding the Power of Strategic Design. Proceedings of the ACD Conference on Strategic Design, 5–10, New York: American Center for Design.

Robinson, R. E. (1994b), “Making Sense of Making Sense: Frameworks and Organizational Perception,” Design Management Journal, 5 (1): 8–15.

Robinson, R. E. (1998), “A Cure for the Black Box Blues,” Perspective, Summer.

Robinson, R. E. (2001), “Capitalist Tool, Humanist Tool,” Design Management Journal, 12 (2): 15–19.

Robinson, R. E. (2009), “‘Let’s Bring It Up to B Flat’: What Style Offers Applied Ethnographic Work,” in M. Cotton and S. Pulman-Jones (eds.), EPIC 2009: Taking Care of Business. Proceedings of the EPIC 2009, 92–107, Washington: American Anthropological Society.

Robinson, R. E. and J. P. Hackett (1997), “Creating the Conditions of Creativity,” Design Management Journal, 8 (4): 10–6.

Robinson, R. E. and J. R. Nims (1996), “Insight into What Really Matters,” Innovation, Summer: 18–21.

Suchman, L. (2000), Anthropology as “Brand”: Reflections on Corporate Anthropology, Lancaster: Lancaster University.

Walters, J. and H. Gardner (1988), “The Crystallizing Experience: Discovering an Intellectual Gift,” in R. Sternberg and J. Davidson (eds.), Conceptions of Giftedness, 306–31, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
